Title: A Theory of the Learnable

Abstract: Humans appear to be able to learn new concepts without needing to be programmed explicitly in any conventional sense. In this paper we regard learning as the phenomenon of knowledge acquisition in the absence of explicit programming. We give a precise methodology for studying this phenomenon from a computational viewpoint. It consists of choosing an appropriate information gathering mechanism, the learning protocol, and exploring the class of concepts that can be learnt using it in a reasonable (polynomial) number of steps. We find that inherent algorithmic complexity appears to set serious limits to the range of concepts that can be so learnt. The methodology and results suggest concrete principles for designing realistic learning systems.

Content: 

RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS Artificial Intelligence and Language Processing A Theory of the Learnable David 
Waltz Editor L, G. VALIANT ABSTRACT: Humans appear to be able to learn new concepts without needing 
to be programmed explicitly in any conventional sense. In this paper we regard learning as the phenomenon 
of knowledge acquisition in the absence of explicit programming. We give a precise methodology for studying 
this phenomenon from a computational viewpoint. It consists of choosing an appropriate information gathering 
mechanism, the learning protocol, and exploring the class of concepts that can be learned using it in 
a reasonable (polynomial) number of steps. Although inherent algorithmic complexity appears to set serious 
limits to the range of concepts that can be learned, we show that there are some important nontrivial 
classes of propositional concepts that can be learned in a realistic sense. 1. INTRODUCTION Computability 
theory became possible once precise models became available for modeling the common- place phenomenon 
of mechanical calculation. The the- ory that evolved has been used to explain human expe- rience and 
to suggest how artificial computing devices should be built. It is also worth studying for its own sake. 
The commonplace phenomenon of learning surely merits similar attention. The problem is to discover good 
models that are interesting to study for their own sake and that promise to be relevant both to explaining 
human experience and to building devices that can learn. The models should also shed light on the limits 
of what can be learned, just as computability does on what can be computed. In this paper we shall say 
that a program for perform- ing a task has been acquired by learning if it has been acquired by any means 
other than explicit program- ming. Among human skills some clearly appear to have This research was supported 
in part by National Science Foundation grant MCS-83-02385. A preliminary version of this paper appeared 
in the proceedings of the 16th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Washington, D.C., 1984, 436-445. 
&#38;#169;1984ACMO001-0782/84/1100-113475¢ a genetically preprogrammed element, whereas some others consist 
of executing an explicit sequence of in- structions that has been memorized. There remains a large area 
of skill acquisition where no such explicit programming is identifiable. It is this area that we de- 
scribe here as learning. The recognition of familiar ob- jects, such as tables, provides such examples. 
These skills often have the additional property that, although we have learned them, we find it difficult 
to articulate what algorithm we are really using. In these cases it would be especially significant if 
machines could be made to acquire them by learning. This paper is concerned with precise computational 
models of the learning phenomenon. We shall restrict ourselves to skills that consist of recognizing 
whether a concept (or predicate) is true or not for given data. We shall say that a concept Q has been 
learned if a pro- gram for recognizing it has been deduced (i.e., by some method other than the acquisition 
from the outside of the explicit program). The main contribution of this paper is that it shows that 
it is possible to design learning machines that have all three of the following properties: 1. The machines 
can provably learn whole classes of concepts. Furthermore, these classes can be charac- terized. 2. 
The classes of concepts are appropriate and nontri- vial for general-purpose knowledge. 3. The computational 
process by which the machines deduce the desired programs requires a feasible (i.e., polynomial) number 
of steps.  A learning machine consists of a learning protocol to-gether with a deduction procedure. 
The former specifies the manner in which information is obtained from the outside. The latter is the 
mechanism by which a correct recognition algorithm for the concept to be learned is deduced. At the broadest 
level, the suggested methodol-ogy for studying learning is the following: Define a plau- sible learning 
protocol, and investigate the class of con- cepts for which recognition programs can be deduced in polynomial 
time using the protocol. The specific protocols considered in this paper allow for two kinds of information 
supply. First the learner has access to a supply of typical data that positively exemplify the concept. 
More precisely, it is assumed that these positive examples have a probabilistic distri- bution determined 
arbitrarily by nature. A call of a routine EXAMPLES produces one such positive exam- ple. The relative 
probability of producing different ex- amples is determined by the distribution. The second source of 
information that may be available is a routine ORACLE. In its most basic version, when presented with 
data, it will tell the learner whether or not the data positively exemplify the concept. The major remaining 
design choice that has to be made is that of knowledge representation. Since our declared aim is to represent 
general knowledge, it seems almost unavoidable that we use some kind of logic rather than, for example, 
formal grammars or geo- metrical constructs. In this paper we shall represent concepts as Boolean functions 
of a set of propositional variables. The recognition algorithms that we attempt to deduce will be therefore 
Boolean circuits or expres- sions. The adequacy of the propositional calculus for repre- senting knowledge 
in practical learning systems is clearly a crucial and controversial question. Few would argue that this 
much power is not necessary. The ques- tion is whether it is enough. There are several argu- ments suggesting 
that such a system would, at least, be a very good start. First, when one examines the most famous examples 
of systems that embody prepro- grammed knowledge, namely, expert systems such as DENDRAL and MYC!N, essentially 
no logical notation beyond the propositional calculus is used. Surely it would be overambitious to try 
to base learning systems on representations that are more powerful than those that have been successfully 
managed in programmed systems. Second, the results in this paper can be nega- tively interpreted to suggest 
that the class of learnable concepts even within the propositional calculus is se- verely circumscribed. 
This suggests that the search for extensions to the propositional calculus that have sub- stantially 
larger learnable classes may be a difficult one. The positive conclusions of this paper are that there 
are specific classes of concepts that are learnable in polynomial time using learning protocols of the 
kind described. These classes can all be characterized by defining the class of programs that recognize 
them. In each case the programs are special kinds of Boolean expressions. The three classes are (l) conjunctive 
nor- mal form expressions with a bounded number of liter- als in each clause, (2) monotone disjunctive 
normal form expressions, and (3) arbitrary expressions in which each variable occurs just once. In the 
first of these, no calls of the oracle are necessary. In the last, no access to typical examples is necessary 
but the ora- cles need to be more powerful than the one described above. The deduction procedure will 
in each case output an expression that with high likelihood closely approxi- mates the expression to 
be learned. Such an approxi- mate expression never says yes when it should not but may say no on a small 
fraction of the probability space of positive examples. This fraction can be made arbi- trarily small 
by increasing the runtime of the deduction procedure. Perhaps the main technical discovery con- tained 
in the paper is that with this probabilistic notion of learning highly convergent learning is possible 
for whole classes of Boolean functions. This appears to dis- tinguish this approach from more traditional 
ones where learning is seen as a process of "inducing" some general rule from information that is insufficient 
for a reliable deduction to be made. The power of this proba- bi!istic viewpoint is illustrated, for 
example, by the fact that an arbitrary set of polynomially many positive ex- amples cannot be relied 
on to determine expressions consisting even of only a single monomial in any relia- ble way. A more detailed 
description of this methodo- logical problem can be found in [9]. There is another aspect of our formulation 
that is worth emphasizing. In a learning system that is about to learn a new concept, there may be an 
enormous number of propositional variables available. These may be primitive inputs, the values of preprogrammed 
con- cepts, or the values of concepts that have been lcarned previously. We want the complexity of learning 
the new concept to be related only to the number of vari- ables that may be set in natural examples of 
it, and not on the cardinality of the universe of available variables. Hence, the questions asked of 
ORACLE and the values given by EXAMPLES will not be truth assignments to all the variables. In the archetypal 
case, they will spec- ify an assignment to a subset of the variables that is still sufficient to guarantee 
the truth of the function. Whether the classes of learnable Boolean concepts can be extended significantly 
beyond the three classes given is an interesting question. There is circumstantial evidence from cryptography, 
however, that the whole class of functions computable by polynomial size cir- cuits is not learnable. 
Consider a cryptographic scheme that encodes messages by evaluating the function Ek where k specifies 
the key. Suppose that this scheme is immune to chosen plaintext attack in the sense that, even if the 
values of Ek are known for polynomially many dynamically chosen inputs, it is computationally infeasible 
to deduce an algorithm for Ek or for an ap- proximation to it. This is equivalent to saying, however, 
that Ek is not learnable. The conjectured existence of good cryptographic functions that are easy to 
compute therefore implies that some easy-to-compute functions are not learnable. If the class of learnable 
concepts is as severely lim- ited as suggested by our results, then it would follow that the only way 
of teaching more complicated con- cepts is to build them up from such simple ones. Thus, a good teacher 
would have to identify, name, and se- quence these intermediate concepts in the manner of a programmer. 
The results of learnability theory would then indicate the maximum granularity of the single concepts 
that can be acquired without programming. In summary, this paper attempts to explore the limits of what 
is learnable as allowed by algorithmic complex- ity. The results are distinguishable from the diverse 
body of previous work on learning because they at- tempt to reconcile the three properties ((1)-(3)) 
men- tioned earlier. Closest in rigor to our approach is the inductive inference literature (see Angluin 
and Smith [1] for a survey) that deals with inducing such things as recursive functions or formal grammars 
(but not Boo- lean functions) from examples. There is a large body of work on pattern recognition and 
classification, using statistical and other tools (e.g., [4]), but the question of general knowledge 
representation is not addressed there directly. Learning, in various less formal senses, has been studied 
widely as a branch of artificial intelli- gence. A survey and bibliography can be found in [2, 7]. In 
their terminology the subject of this paper is concept learning. In previous work on learning, much emphasis 
is placed on the diversity of methods that humans appear to be using. These include learning by example, 
learn- ing by analogy, and learning by being told. This paper emphasizes the polarity between learning 
by being pro- grammed and learning in the absence of any program- ming element. Many of the conventionally 
accepted modes of learning can be regarded as being hybrids of these two extremes. 2. A LEARNING PROTOCOL 
FOR BOOLEAN FUNCTIONS We consider t Boolean variables pl ..... pt, each of which can take the value 1 
or 0 to indicate whether the associated proposition is true or false. There is no as- sumption about 
the independence of the variables. In- deed, they may be functions of each other. A vector is an assignment 
to each of the t variables of a value from {0, 1, *}. The symbol * denotes that a variable is undetermined. 
A vector is total if every vari- able is determined (i.e., is assigned a value from {0, 1}). For example, 
the assignment pl = p3 = 1, p4 = 0, and p2 = * is a vector that is not total. A Boolean function F is 
a mapping from the set of 2 t total vectors to {0, 1}. A Boolean function F becomes a concept F if its 
domain is extended to the set of all vectors as follows: For a vector v, F(v) = 1 if and only if F(w) 
= 1 for all total vectors w that agree with v on all variables for which v is determined. The purpose 
of this extension is that it permits us not to mention the variables on which F does not depend. Given 
a concept F, we consider an arbitrary probabil-ity distribution D over the set of all vectors v such 
that F(v) = 1. In other words, for each v such that F(v) = 1, it is the case that D(v} _> O. Also ~ D(v) 
= 1 when summa- tion is over this set of vectors. There are no other as- sumed restrictions on D, which 
is intended to describe the relative frequency with which the positive exam- ples of F occur in nature. 
What are reasonable learning protocols to consider? First we must avoid giving the teacher too much power, 
namely, the power to communicate a program instruc- tion by instruction. For example, if a premeditated 
se- quence of vectors with repetitions could be communi- cated, then this could be used to encode the 
description of the program even if just two such vectors were used for binary notation. Second we must 
avoid giving the teacher what is evidently too little power. In particular, the protocol must provide 
some typical examples of vectors for which F is true, for otherwise, if F is true for just one vector 
that is total, only an exponential search or more powerful oracles would be able to find it. Such considerations 
led us to consider the following learning protocol as a reasonable one. It gives the learner access to 
the following two routines: 1. EXAMPLES: This has no input. It gives as output a vector v such that F(v) 
= 1. For each such v, the probability that v is output on any single call is D(v). 2. ORACLE( ): On vector 
v, as input it outputs 1 or 0 according to whether F(v) = 1 or 0. The first of these gives randomly chosen 
positive ex- amples of the concept being learned. The second pro- vides a test for whether a vector, 
which the deduction procedure considers to be critical, is an example of the concept or not. In a real 
system, the oracle may be a human expert, a database of past observations, some deduction system, or 
a combination of these. Finally we observe that our particular choice of learning protocol was strongly 
influenced by the earlier decision to deal with concepts rather than raw Boolean functions. If we were 
to deal with the latter, then many other alternatives are equally natural. For example, given a vector 
v, instead of asking, as we do, whether all completions of it make the function true, we could ask whether 
there exist any completions that make it true. This suggests natural alternative semantics for EXAMPLES 
and ORACLE. In Section 7 we shall use such more elaborate oracles. 3. LEARNABILITY We shall consider 
various classes of programs having pl ..... pt as inputs and show that in each case any program in the 
class can be deduced, with only small probability of error, in polynomial time using the proto- col previously 
described. We assume that programs can take the values 1, 0, and undetermined. More precisely we say 
that a class X of programs is learnable with respect to a given learning protocol if and only if there 
exists an algorithm A {the deduction pro- cedure} invoking the protocol with the following prop- erties: 
1. The algorithm runs in time polynomial in an ad- justable parameter h, in the various parameters that 
quantify the size of the program to be learned, and in the number of variables t.  2. For all programs 
f E X and all distributions D over vectors v on which f outputs 1, the algorithm will deduce with probability 
at least (1 - h -1} a program g ~ X that never outputs one when it should not but outputs one almost 
always when it should. In  particular, {i) for all vectors v, g(v) = i implies f(v) = 1, and (ii} the 
sum of D(v) over all v such that f(v) = 1, but g(v) ~ 1 is at most h-1. In our definition we have disallowed 
positive an- swers from g to be wrong, only because the particular classes X in this paper do not require 
it. This we call one-sided error learning, in other circumstances it may be efficacious to allow two-sided 
errors. In that more general case, we would need to put a probability distri- bution D on the set of 
vectors such that f(v} ~ 1. Condi- tion (i) i n (2} is then replaced by ~ D{v} over all v such that f(v) 
~ 1, but g{v) = 1 is at most h-1. A second aspect of our definition is that the parame- ter h is used 
in two independent probabilistic bounds. This simplifies the statement of the results. It would be more 
precise, however, to work explicitly with two in- dependent parameters hi and h2. Third we should note 
that programs that compute concepts should be distinguished from those that com- pute merely the Boolean 
function. This distinction has little consequence for the three classes of expressions that we consider, 
since in these cases programs for the concepts follow directly from the specification of the expressions. 
For the sake of generality, our definitions do allow the value of a program to be undefined, since a 
nontotal vector will not, in general, determine the value of an expression as 0 or 1. It would be interesting 
to obtain negative results, other than the informal cryptographic evidence men- tioned in the introduction, 
indicating that the class of unrestricted Boolean circuits is not learnable. A recent result [6] in this 
direction does establish this, under the hypothesis that integer factorization is intractable. Their 
result applies to the learning protocol consisting of EXAMPLES and ORACLE, when the latter is re- stricted 
to total vectors. It may also be interesting to go in the opposite direction and determine, for example, 
whether the hypothesis that P equals NP would imply that all interesting classes are learnable. 4. A 
COMBINATORIAL BOUND The probabilistic analysis needed for our later results can be abstracted into a 
single lemma. The proof of the lemma is independent of the rest of the paper. We define the function 
L(h,s) for any real number h greater than one and any positive integer S as follows: Let L(h,S) be the 
smallest integer such that in L(h,S) independent Bernoulli trials each with probability at least h-1 
of success, the probability of having fewer than S successes is less than h -1. The relevance of the 
function L(h,S) to learning can be illustrated as follows: Consider an urn U containing a very large 
number of marbles possibly of many differ- ent types. Suppose we wish to "learn" what kinds of marbles 
U contains by taking a small random sample X. If all the marbles in U are of distinct types, then it 
is clearly impossible to deduce much information about them. Suppose, however, that we know that there 
are only S types of marbles and that we wish to choose X so that it contains representatives of all but 
1 percent of the marbles in U. Whatever the respective frequencies of the S types may be, the definition 
of L(h,S} implies that if iX[ = L(100,S) then with probability greater than 99 percent we will have succeeded. 
To see why this implication holds, suppose that after L(100,S} successive choices marble types representing 
between them at least 1 percent of the urn remain unchosen. In that case we have made L[100,S) Bernoulli 
trials each with prob- ability at least 1 percent of success 0.e., of choosing a previously unchosen 
type} and have succeeded fewer than S times (since some type remains unchosen}. Note that what constitutes 
a success here will depend on previous choices. The probability of success, however, will always be at 
least 1 percent, independent of pre- vious choices, and this is sufficient for our argument. The following 
simple upper bound holds for the whole range of values of S and h and shows that L(h,S) is essentially 
linear both in h and in S. PROPOSITION: For all integers S >_ 1 and all real h>l. L(h,S) _< 2h(S + log~h). 
 Proof: We use the following three well-known ine- qualities of which the last is due to Chernoff (see 
[6] page 18). 1. For allx> 0, (1 + x-l} x<e. 2. For allx>0,(1-x-1} x<e -I. 3. In m independent trials, 
each with probability at least p of success, the probability that there are at most k success, where 
k < mp, is at most  m - The first factor in the expression in (a) above can be rewritten as 1 mp k~ 
((m-k)/(mp-k}}{mp-k} F/ Using (2) with x = (m -k)/(mp -k}, we can upper bound the product by e-mp+k(mp 
/k) k. Substituting m = 2h(S + log~h), p = h -1, and k = S and using logarithms to the base e gives 
the bound e-2S-21ogh+S.[2(1 + (tog h)/S)] (s/l°g h)log h. Rewriting this using (1} with x = (log~h}/S 
gives e-S-21og h. 2 s. elOg h _< (2/e)S. e-log h < h-1. As an illustration of an application, suppose 
that we hare access to EXAMPLES, a source of natural positive examples of vectors for concept F. Suppose 
that we want to find an approximation to the subset P of vari- ables that are determined in at least 
one natural exam- ple of F. Consider the following procedure: Pick the first L(h, IPI} vectors provided 
by EXAMPLES, and let P' be the union of the sets of variables determined by these vectors. The definition 
then implies that with probabil- ity at least 1 - h -1 the set P' will have the following property: If 
a vector is chosen with probability distribu- tion D, then the probability that it determines a vari- 
able in P -P' is less than h-1. The argument used above for the urn model establishes this as follows: 
If P' does not have the claimed property, then the following has happened: L(h, [P[) trials have been 
made (i.e., calls of EXAMPLES) each with probability greater than h-1 of success (i.e., finding a vector 
that determines a vari- able in P -P', but there have been fewer than [P] successes (i.e., discoveries 
of new additions to P'). The probability of such a happening is less than h -1 by the definition of L. 
The above application shows that the set of variables that are determined in natural examples of F can 
be approximated by a procedure whose runtime is inde- pendent of t, the total number of variables. It 
follows that in the definition Of learnability the dependence on t in part (1} can be relaxed to a dependence 
on the number of variables that are ever defined in positive examples.  5. BOUNDED CNF EXPRESSIONS A 
conjunctive normal form (CNF) expression is any prod- uct c~c2  Cr of clauses where each clause ci 
is a sum q~ + q2 +  + qi, of literals. A literal q is either a variable p or the negation p of a variable. 
For example, (p~ + #2)(p~ + fi2 + pa) is a CNF expression. For a positive integer k, a k-CNF expression 
is a CNF expres- sion where each clause is the sum of at most k literals. For CNF expressions in general, 
we do not know of any polynomial time deduction procedure with respect to our learning protocol. The 
question of whether one exists is tantalizing because of its apparent simplicity. In this section we 
shall prove that for any fixed inte- ger k the class of k-CNF expressions is learnable. In fact it is 
learnable easily in the sense that calls of EXAM- PLES suffice and no calls Of ORACLE are required. 
In this and subsequent sections, we shall use the re- lation ~ on concepts as follows: F ~ G means that 
for all vectors v whenever F(v) = 1 it is also the case that G(v} = i. (N.B. This is equivalent to the 
relation F ~ G when F, G are regarded as functions.) For brevity we shall often denote both expressions 
and even vectors by the concepts they represent. Thus the concept repre- sented by vector w is true for 
exactly those vectors that agree with w on all variables on which w is determined. The concept represented 
by expression f is obtained by considering the Boolean function computed by f and extending its domain 
to become a concept. In this sec- tion we regard a clause cl to be a special kind of expres- sion. In 
Sections 7 and 8, we consider monomials m, simple products of literals, as special forms of expres- sions. 
In all cases statements of the form f ~ g, v ~ ci, v ~ m, or m ~ f can be understood by interpreting 
the two sides as concepts or functions in the obvious way. THEOREM A: For any positive integer k, the 
class of k-CNF expressions is learnable via an algorithm A that uses L = L(h, (2t) k÷l) calls of EXAMPLES 
and no calls of ORA- CLE, where t is the number of variables. Proof: The algorithm is initialized with 
formula g as the product of all possible clauses of up to k literals from { pl, pl, p2,/~2 ..... pt, 
#t}. Clearly the number of ways of choosing a clause of exactly k literals is at most (2t} k, and hence 
the number of ways of choosing a clause with up to k literals is less than 2t + (2t) 2 + + (2t) k < {2t} 
k+l. This bounds the initial number of clauses in g. The algorithm then calls EXAMPLES L times to give 
positive examples of the concept represented by k-CNF formula f. For each vector v so obtained, it deletes 
all of the remaining clauses in g that do not contain a literal that is determined to be true in v (i.e., 
in the clauses deleted, each literal is either not determined or is ne- gated in v}. More precisely the 
following is repeated L times: begin v := EXAMPLES for each ci in g delete ci if v ~ cl. end The claim 
is that with high probability the value of g after the Lth execution of this block will be the desired 
approximation to the formula f that is being learned. Initially the set of vectors Iv[ v ~ g} is clearly 
empty. We first claim that as the algorithm proceeds the set [v[v ~g} will always be a subset of {v Iv 
~f}. To prove this it is clearly sufficient to prove the same statement when both sets are restricted 
to only total vectors. Let B be the product of all the clauses c con- taining up to k literals with the 
property that "Vv if v ~ f then v ~ c." It is clear that in the course of the algorithm no clause in 
B can ever be deleted. Hence it is certainly true that {v [ v ~ g} C {v[v ~ B}. To estab- lish the claim, 
it remains only to prove that B computes the same Boolean function as f. (In fact B will be the maximal 
k-CNF formula equivalent to f.) it is easy to see that f~ B, since by the definition of B, for every 
c in B it is the case that "for all v if v ~ f then v ~ c." To verify the converse, that B ~ f, we first 
note that, by definition, f is a k-CNF formula. If some clause in f did not occur in B, then this clause 
c' would have the property that "3v such that v ~fbut v ~ c'." But this is impossible since if c' is 
a clause of f and if v ~-~ c' then v ~ f. We conclude that every k-CNF representa- tion of the function 
that f represents consists of a set of clauses that is a subset of the clauses in B. Hence B ~ f. Let 
X = ~ D(v) with summation over all (not neces- sarily total) vectors v such that v ~ f but v ~ g. This 
quantity is defined for each intermediate value of g in the course of the algorithm and, as is easily 
verified, it is monotone decreasing with time. Now clauses will be removed from g whenever EXAMPLES outputs 
a vector v such that v ~ g. The probability of this happening at any moment is exactly the current value 
of X. Also, the process of running the algorithm to completion can have one of just two possible outcomes: 
(1) At some point X becomes less than h -I, in which case the g found will approximate to f exactly as 
required by the definition of learnability. (2) The value of X never goes below h -1, and hence g is 
not an acceptable approxima- tion. The probability of the latter eventuality is, how- ever, at most h-1 
since it corresponds to the situation of performing L(h, (2t) k+l) Bernoulli experiments (i.e., calls 
of EXAMPLES) each with probability greater than h -1 of success (i.e., finding a v such that v ~ g) and 
obtain- ing fewer than (2t) k+l successes (a success being mani- fested by the removal of at least one 
clause from g). [] In conclusion we observe that a CNF expression g immediately yields a program for 
computing the associ- ated concept. Given a vector v, we substitute the deter- mined truth values in 
g. The concept will be true for v if and only if all the clauses are made true by the substitution. 6. 
DNF EXPRESSIONS A disjunctive normal form (DNF) expression is any sum ml + m2 +  + mr of monomials 
where each monom- ial mi is a product of literals. For example, pl/~2 + plp3p4 is a DNF expression. Such 
expressions appear particu- larly easy for humans to comprehend. Hence we expect that any practical learning 
system would have to allow for them. An expression is monotone if no variable is negated in it. We shall 
show that for monotone DNF expressions there exists a simple deduction procedure that uses both EXAMPLES 
and ORACLE. For unrestricted DNF a similar result can be proved with respect to a different size measure. 
In the unrestricted case, there is the addi- tional difficulty that we can guarantee to deduce a pro- 
gram only for the function and not for the concept. This difficulty does not arise in the monotone case 
where given an expression we can always compute the value of the associated concept.for a vector v by 
making the substitution and asking whether the resulting expres- sion is identically true. A monomial 
m is a prime implicant of a function F (or of an expression representing the function) if m ~ F and if 
m' ~,~ F for any m' obtained by deleting one literal from m. A DNF expression is prime if it consists 
of the sum of prime implicants none of which is redun- dant in the sense of being implied by the sum 
of the others. There is always a unique prime DNF expression in the monotone case, but not in general. 
We therefore define the degree of a DNF expression to be the largest number of monomials that a prime 
DNF expression equivalent to it can have. The unique prime DNF expression in the monotone case is simply 
the sum of all the prime implicants. THEOREM B: The class of monotone DNF expressions is learnable via 
an algorithm B that uses L = L(h,d) calls of EXAMPLES and dt calls of ORACLE, where d is the degree of 
the DNF expression f to be learned and t the number of variables. Proof: The algorithm is initialized 
with formula g identically equal to the constant zero. The algorithm then calls EXAMPLES L times to produce 
positive ex- amples of f. Each time a vector v is produced such that v ~ g, a new monomial m is added 
to g. The monomial m is the product of those literals determined in v that are essential to make v ~,~ 
f. More precisely, the loop that is executed L times is the following: begin v := EXAMPLES if v ~ g then 
begin for i := 1 to t do if pi is determined in v then begin set ~ equal to v but with pi := *; if ORACLE(W) 
= 1 then v := end set m equal to the product of all literals q such that v ~ q; g:=g+m end end The test 
v ~ g amounts to asking whether none of the monomials of g are made true by the values deter- mined to 
be true in v. Every time EXAMPLES produces a value v such that v ~ g, the inner loop of the algo- rithm 
will find a prime implicant m to add to g. Each such m is different from any previously added (since 
the contrary would have implied that v ~ g). It follows that such a v will be found at most d times, 
and hence ORACLE will he called at most dt times. Let X = ~ D(w) with summation over all (not neces- 
sarily total) vectors w such that w ~ f but w ~ g. This quantity is defined for each intermediate value 
of g in the course of the algorithm, is initially unity, and de- creases monotonically with time. Now 
a monomial will be added to g each time EXAMPLES outputs a vector v such that v ~-~ g. The probability 
of this occurring at any call of EXAMPLES is exactly X. The process of running the algorithm to completion 
can have just two possible outcomes: (1) At some time X has become less than h -1, in which case the 
final expression g found will approximate to f as required by the definition of learnability; and (2) 
the value of X never goes below h -1, and hence g is not an acceptable approximation. The probability 
of this second eventuality is, however, at most h -1, since it corresponds to the situation of performing 
L(h,d) Bernoulli experiments (i.e., calls of EXAMPLES} each with probability greater than h-1 of success 
(i.e., of finding a v such that v ~ f but v ~ g) and obtaining fewer than d successes (each manifested 
by the addition of a new monomial). [] For unrestricted DNF expressions, several problems arise. The 
main source of difficulty is the fact that the problem of determining whether a nontotal vector im- plies 
the function specified by a DNF formula is NP-hard. This is simply because the problem of determin- ing 
whether the nowhere determined vector implies the function is the tautology question of Cook [3]. An 
immediate consequence of this is that it is unreasona- ble to assume that the program being learned computes 
concepts rather than functions. Another consequence is that in any algorithm akin to Algorithm B the 
test v ~ g may not be feasible if v is not total. Algorithm B is sufficient, however, to establish the 
following: THEOREM B': Suppose the notion of learnability is re- stricted to distributions D such that 
D(v) = 0 whenever v is not total. Then the class of DNF expressions is learnable, in the sense that programs 
for the functions (but not necessar- ily the concepts) can be deduced in L(h,d) calls of EXAM- PLES and 
dt calls of ORACLE where d is the degree of the DNF expression to be learned. The reader should note 
that here there is the addi- tional philosophical difficulty that availability of the expression does 
not in itself imply a polynomial time algorithm for ORACLE. On the other hand, the theorem does say that 
if an agent has some, maybe ad hoc, black box for ORACLE whose workings are unknown to him or her, it 
can be used to teach someone else a DNF expression that approximates the function. Finally, it may be 
worth emphasizing that the mono- tone case is nonproblematic and the deduction proce- dure for it very 
simpleminded. It may be interesting to pursue more sophisticated deduction procedures for it if contexts 
can be found in which they can be proved advantageous. The question as to whether monotone DNF expressions 
can be learned from EXAMPLES alone is open. A positive answer would be especially signifi- cant. A partial 
result in this direction can be obtained by dualizing Theorem A: For any k the class of DNF expressions 
having a bound k on the length of each disjunct can be learned in polynomial time from nega- tive examples 
alone (i.e., from a source of vectors v such that/3(v) # 0). 7. a-EXPRESSIONS We have already seen a 
class of expressions, namely the k-CNF expressions, that can be learned from posi- tive examples alone. 
Here we shall consider the other extreme, a class that can be learned using oracles alone. Deducing expressions 
on which there are less severe structural restrictions than DNF or CNF appears much more difficult. The 
aim of this section is to give a para- digmatic example of how far one can go in that direc- tion if 
one is willing to pay the price of oracles that are more sophisticated than the one previously described. 
A general expression over variable set {pl ..... pt} is defined recursively as follows: 1. For each 
i (1 _< i _< t) "pl" and "Pi" are expressions; 2. iff~ ..... fr are expressions, then "(fl + f2 + .-" 
+ fr)" is an expression (called a plus expression);  3. if fl ..... fi are expressions, then "(fl x 
f2 x ... x fr)" is an expression (called a times expression).  A a-expression is an expression in which 
each vari- able appears at most once. We can assume that a r- expression is monotone, since we can always 
relabel negated variables with new names that denote their negation. In the recursive definition of any 
ju- expression, there are clearly at most 2t - 1 intermedi- ate expressions of which at most t are of 
type (1) and at most t - 1 of types (2) or (3). Without loss of generality, we shall assume that in the 
definition of a t-expression rules (2) and (3) alternate. We shall regard two/z- expressions as identical 
if their definitions can be made formally the same by reordering sums and products and relabeling as 
necessary. For learning a-expressions, we shall employ more powerful oracles. The boundary between reasonable 
and unreasonable oracles does not appear sharp. We make no claims about the reasonableness of these new 
oracles except that they may serve as vehicles for un- derstanding learnability. The definitions refer 
to the Boolean function F (not regarded as a concept here). The oracle of Section 2 will be renamed N-ORACLE, 
since it is one of necessity: N- ORACLE(v) = 1 if and only if for all total vectors w such that w ~ v 
it is the case that F(w) = 1. The dual of this would be a possibility oracle: P-ORACLE(v) = 1 if and 
only if there exists a total vector w such that w ~ v and F(w} = 1. For brevity we shall also define 
the prime implicant oracle: Pl(v) = 1 if and only if N-ORACLE(v) = 1, but N-ORACLE(w) = 0 for any w obtained 
from v by making one variable determined in v undetermined. Finally we define two further oracles, ones 
of relevant possibility RP and of relevant accompaniment RA. For con- venience we define the first by 
how it behaves on vec- tors represented as monomials: RP(m) = 1 iff from some monomial m' ram' is a prime 
implicant off. For sets V, W of variables, we define RA(V, W) = 1 iff every prime implicant off that 
contains a variable from V also contains a variable from W. THEOREM C: The class of in-expressions in 
learnable via a deduction procedure C that uses O(t 3) calls of N-ORACLE RP and RA altogether, where 
t is the number of variables (and no calls of EXAMPLES). The procedure always deduces exactly the correct 
expression. Proof: Let ~ be the monomial that is the product of no literals. The algorithm will first 
compute RP{pj) for each pj to determine which of the variables occur in the prime implicants of the function 
that the expression f to be learned represents. Let gl ..... gr be distinct single variable expressions, 
one for each pj for which RP(p/) = 1. Note that these are exactly the variables that occur in f, since 
f is monotone. With each gi we associate two monomials mi and rhi. The former will be the single variable 
pj that gi repre-sents. The latter is defined as any monomial rh having no variable in common with m~ 
such that m~rh is a prime implicant off. The algorithm will construct each such rhi as the final value 
of m in the following proce- dure: Set m = ~; while PI(mmi) = 0 find a p~ not in mini such that RP(pkmmi) 
= 1 and set m := pkm. Hence in at most t 2 calls of PI (i.e., t 3 calls of N-ORACLE) and t 2 calls of 
RP values for every rhi will be found. Once initialized the algorithm proceeds by alter- nately executing 
a plus-phase and a times-phase. At the start of each phase, we have a set of expressions gl ..... gr 
where each gi is associated with two monomials mi and rhi (having no variables in common) where mi is 
a prime implicant ofgi and mirhi is a prime implicant off. We distinguish the gs as plus or times expressions 
accord-ing to whether the outermost construction rule was addition or multiplication. A plus-phase will 
first com- pute an equivalence relation S on the subset of {gi} that are times expressions. For each 
equivalence class G such that no gi E G already occurs as a summand in a sum, we construct a new expression 
that is the sum of the members of G and call this sum gk where k is a previously unused index. If some 
members of G already occur in a sum, say gj (N.B. they are never distributed in more than one sum), then 
we modify the sum expression &#38; to equal the sum of every expression in G. A times-phase is exactly 
analogous except that it com- putes a different equivalence relation T, now on plus expressions, and 
will form new, or extend old, times expressions. In the above context, single variable expressions will 
be regarded as both times and plus expressions. Also, it is immaterial which of the two kinds of phase 
is used to start the algorithm. The intention of the algorithm is best expressed by the claim to follow, 
which will be verified later. Sup- pose that the expressions occurring in the definition off are f~ ..... 
fq (where q _< 2t - 1}. We shall say that g _< fi iff the set of prime implicants of g is a subset of 
the set of prime implicants of fi where (1) iffi is a plus expres- sion then fi = fi and (2) iffi is 
a times expression then f~ is the product of some subset of the multiplicands off~. Claim 1: After every 
phase of the algorithm for every g~ that has been constructed, there is exactly one expression fi such 
that (1) gi -< fi and (2) fi is of the same kind (i.e., plus or times) as gi. The procedure builds up 
the rooted tree of the expression as rooted subtrees starting from the leaves. One evident difficulty 
is that there is no a priori knowl- edge available about the shape of the tree. Hence in the grafting 
process a subtree may become attached to an- other at just about any node. Whenever a plus or times expression 
gi is created or enlarged, its associated mi and thi are updated as fol- lows. If gi is a sum, then we 
let mi = mj and rhi = ~j for any &#38; that is a summand in g~. Ifg~ is a product, then m~ will be the 
product of all the mjs that correspond to multiplicands in gi. Finally rhi will be generated as the final 
value of m in the following procedure: Set m := ~; while Pl(mmi) = 0 find a pk not in mini such that 
RP(pkmmi) = 1 and set m := pkm. Since such an rhi has to be found at most t times in the overall algorithm, 
the total cost is at most t 2 calls of PI (i.e., t 3 calls of N- ORACLE) and t 2 calls of RP. In order 
to complete the description of the algorithm, it remains only to define the equivalence relations S and 
T. Definition: giS&#38; if and only if 1. PI(rnirhj) = PI(mjrhi) = 1 and 2. mi, ~j contain disjoint sets 
of variables, as do mj, mi. For defining T we shall denote by Vi the set of vari- ables that occur in 
the expression gi. Definition: giTgj if and only if RA(Vi, Vj) = RA(V# Vi) First we shall verify that 
S and T are indeed equiva- lence relations under the assumption that Claim 1 holds at the beginning of 
each phase. Clearly S and T are defined to be both reflexive and symmetric. To verify that T is transitive, 
suppose that giTgj and &#38;Tgk. The former implies that every prime implicant of f con- taining some 
variable from gi also contains some vari- able from &#38;. The latter implies that every prime impli- 
cant off containing some variable from &#38; also contains a variable from gk. Hence giTgk follows. In 
order to ver- ify the transitivity of S, we shall make a more general observation about any subexpression 
off. Claim 2: If mi, mj are prime implicants of distinct times subexpressions fi, fj off and if for some 
m, with no variable in common with either mi or mj, both mira and mjm are prime implicants off, then 
fi, fj must occur as summands in the same plus expression off. Proof: Most easily verified by representing 
expression f as a directed graph (e.g., [8]) with edges labeled by the Boolean variables. The sets of 
labels along directed paths between a distinguished source node and a dis- tinguished sink node correspond 
exactly to prime im- plicants in the case of # expressions where all edges will have different labels. 
Now to verify that S is transitive, suppose that g~S&#38; and gjSgk where, by Claim 1, gi -< fi, &#38; 
-< f# and gk ~ fk for appropriate times expressions fi, fj, fk. Then it fol- lows that mini, mjrhj, and 
mkrhj are all prime implicants off where mi, m# mk have no variable in common with rhj. It follows from 
Claim 2 that fi, fj, and fk are addends in the same sum expression. Hence giSgk follows. Claim 3: Suppose 
that after some phase of the algo- rithm Claim 1 holds and times expressions g~, gj have been formed 
where gi -< fi, &#38; -< ~, and fi, fj are times expressions. Then gi and &#38; will be placed in the 
same sum expression at the next plus-phase if and only iffi = fi, fj = )~, and ffi, fj are addends in 
the same sum expres- sion in f. Proof: (~) If gi -< fi = fi, &#38; <- fj -- )~j, and fi, fj are in the 
same sum, then mi, mj will be prime implicants off,, ~. Also rnithj and mjrhi will be prime implicants 
off, and the variables in mi will be disjoint from those in rhj as will be those in mj from those in 
rhi. Hence giSgj will hold and gi,gj will he in the same plus expression after the next plus-phase. (~) 
Suppose that gi -< fi, gj -~ fj, and giSgj holds. Then mi, rnj will be prime implicants of gi, &#38;, 
respectively, m~rhj, rnffhj will both be prime implicants off, and the variables in rhj will be disjoint 
from those of both mi and mj. It follows from Claim 2 that fi = 1~ and fj = )~j must occur as summands 
in the same plus expression off. [N.B. Here we are using the fact that Claim 2 remains true if we allow 
a "times subexpression" to be the product of any subset of the multiplicands in a times expression in 
f.] Claim 4: Suppose that after some phase of the algo- rithm, Claim 1 holds and some plus expressions 
gi -< f~ and gj _< fj ~fi, fj plus expressions) have been found. (1) If gi = fi, &#38; = ~, and fi, fi 
are multiplicands in the same times expression in f, then &#38;, &#38; will be placed in the same times 
expression after the next times phase. (2} If gi, g] are placed in the same times expression at any subsequent 
phase, then fi, ~ are in the same product in f. Proof: (1) If the conditions of (1) above hold, then 
giT&#38; will be discovered at the next times-phase and the claim follows. (2) Iffi, J~ are not in the 
same product in f, then f contains some prime implicant containing vari- ables from one of gi, &#38; 
and not from the other. Hence giTgj will never hold. Proof of Claim 1: By induction on the number of 
phases on Claims 1, 3, and 4 simultaneously. We define the depth of a formula fi to be the maxi- mum 
number of alternations of sum and product re- quired in its definition. Claim 5: Iffi is an expression 
of depth k in f, then after k phases a gi identical to fi will have been constructed by the algorithm. 
Proof: By induction on Claims 3 and 4. To conclude the proof of the theorem, it remains to analyze the 
runtime. This is dominated by the cost of computing mi and rhi, for which we have already ac- counted, 
plus the cost of computing the equivalence relations S and T. We first note that fewer than 2t expression 
names gi are used in the course of the algo- rithm. When an expression is grafted into another at a point 
deep in the latter, then the semantics of all the subexpressions above will change. By Claims 3 and 4 
such grafting can occur when a gi is added to a sum expression but not when added to a times expression. 
Hence the values mi and rhi do not need to be changed for any expression when such grafting occurs. It 
follows that for computing S only 2t values of m~, rh~ need to be considered. Hence 0(t 2) calls of PI 
or 0(t a) calls of N- ORACLE suffice overall. For computing T grafting may cause a ripple effect. On 
each occasion the value of Vj may have to be updated for up to t such sets, and hence t 2 calls of RA 
will suffice. Hence 0(t a) calls of RA in the overall algorithm will be enough. [] 8. REMARKS In this 
paper we have considered learning as the proc- ess of deducing a program for performing a task, from 
information that does not provide an explicit descrip- tion of such a program. We have given precise 
meaning to this notion of learning and have shown that in some restricted but nontrivial contexts it 
is computationally feasible. Consider a world containing robots and elephants. Suppose that one of the 
robots has discovered a recog- nition algorithm for elephants that can be meaningfully expressed in k-conjunctive 
normal form. Our Theorem A implies that this robot can communicate its algo- rithm to the rest of the 
robot population by simply exclaiming "elephant" whenever one appears. An important aspect of our approach, 
if cast in its greatest generality, is that we require the recognition algorithms of the teacher and 
learner to agree on an overwhelming fraction of only the natural inputs. Their behavior on unnatural 
inputs is irrelevant, and hence descriptions of all possible worlds are not necessary. If followed to 
its conclusion, this idea has considerable philosophical implications: A learnable concept is noth- ing 
more than a short program that distinguishes some natural inputs from some others. If such a concept 
is passed on among a population in a distributed manner, substantial variations in meaning may arise. 
More im- portantly, what consensus there is will only be meaningful for natural inputs. The behavior 
of an indi- vidual's program for unnatural inputs has no relevance. Hence thought experiments and logical 
arguments in- volving unnatural hypothetical situations may be meaningless activities. The second important 
aspect of the formulation is that the notion of oracles makes it possible to discuss a whole range of 
teacher-learner interactions beyond the mere identification of examples. This is significant in the context 
of artificial intelligence where humans may be willing to go to great lengths to convey their skills 
to machines but are frustrated by their inability to articu- late the algorithms they themselves use 
in the practice of the skills. We expect that some explicit programming does become essential for transmitting 
skills that are beyond certain limits of difficulty. The identification of these limits is a major goal 
of the line of work proposed in this paper.  REFERENCES 1. Angluin, D., Smith, C.H. Inductive inference: 
Theory and methods. Comput. Surv. 15, 3 (Sept. 1983), 237-269. 2. Barr, A., and Feigenbaum, E.A. The 
Handbook of Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 2. William Kaufmann, Los Altos, Calif., 1982.  3. Cook, S.A. 
The complexity of theorem proving procedures. In Pro- ceedings of 3rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory 
of Computing (Shaker Heights, Ohio, May 3-5). ACM, New York, 1971, 151-158. 4. Duda, R.O., and Hart, 
P.F. Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis. Wiley, New York. 1973.  5. ErdSs, P., and Spencer, J. 
Probabilistic Methods in Combinatorics. Aca-demic Press, New York, 1974. 6. Goldreich, O., Goldwasser, 
S., and Micali, S. How to construct ran- dom functions. In Proceedings of 25th IEEE Symposium on Foundations 
of Computer Science (Singer Island, Fla., Oct. 24-26). IEEE, New York, 1984. 7. Michalski, R.S.. Carbonell, 
J.G., and Mitchell, T.M. Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach. Tioga Publishing Co., 
Palo Alto, Calif., 1983. 8. Skyum, S., and Valiant, L.G. A complexity theory based on Boolean algebra. 
In Proceedings of 22rid IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (Nashville, Tenn., Oct. 28-30}. 
IEEE, New York, 1981, 244-253. 9. Valiant, L.G. Deductive learning. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London (1984). To be published.  CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: F.1.1 [Computation 
by Ab- stract Devices[: Models of Computation; F.2.2 [Analysis of Algorithms and Problem Complexity[: 
Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems; L2.6[Artificial Intelligence]: Learning--concept learning General 
Terms: Algorithms Additional Key Words and Phrases: inductive inference, probabilis- tic models of learning, 
propositional expressions Received 1/84; revised 6/84; accepted 7/84 Author's Present Address: L.G. Valiant, 
Center for Research in Comput- ing Technology. Aiken Computation Laboratory, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for direct commer- cial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title 
of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association 
for Computing Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission.