Title: Learning Random Forests on the Gpu

Abstract: Random Forests are a popular and powerful machine learning technique, with several fast multi-core CPU implementations. Since many other machine learning methods have seen impressive speedups from GPU implementations, applying GPU acceleration to random forests seems like a natural fit. Previous attempts to use GPUs have relied on coarse-grained task parallelism and have yielded inconclusive or unsatisfying results. We introduce CudaTree, a GPU Random Forest implementation which adaptively switches between data and task parallelism. We show that, for larger datasets, this algorithm is faster than highly tuned multi-core CPU implementations.

Content: Introduction

Random Forests [3] are a popular [6] [23] learning algorithm for tackling complex prediction problems . They are able to achieve high accuracy across a wide range of datasets, while exposing few hyper-parameters in need of tuning. There are many high-quality CPU implementations of Random Forests, such as scikit-learn [16], wiseRF [18], SPRINT [14], and Random Jungle [20]. . Many other machine learning algorithms have been dramatically accelerated using graphics cards, including convolutional neural networks [11], support vector machines [4], and Latent Dirichlet Allocation [25]. However, none of the commonly available Random Forest libraries can make use of a GPU. At first glance, Random Forests may appear to be an ideal candidate for GPU parallelization: the trees of a random forest can be trained independently, so why not do this in parallel? As we show in this paper, coarse-grained parallelization yields disappointing results on a GPU, which consists of a large number of a individually weak cores. To reap the benefits of many-core hardware, it is necessary to find sources of data parallelism within the training procedure for a single tree. However, data parallelism alone breaks down toward the " bottom " of tree construction, where the number of samples being considered can become small. We show that is possible to overcome this performance barrier by switching from data parallelism to batching the construction of smaller sub-trees.

Related Work

In the most widely cited work on GPU decision tree training, Sharp [21] used Direct3D pixel and vertex shaders to implement Random Forests for visual object recognition. His GPU implementation , however, was also tasked with computing visual feature responses and thus it is unclear to what degree the same code is suitable for general-purpose (non-visual) learning tasks. Other Random Forest implementations on the GPU [7] [15] seem to under-utilize the available parallelism of graphics hardware and have only undergone cursory evaluations. Aside from previous attempts to use GPUs for Random Forest learning, there is an older and deeper literature describing the implementation of single decision trees on (non-GPU) parallel processors [1]. Some of these parallel algorithms, such as SLIQ [13], partition data across multiple processors . Other parallel decision tree learning algorithms [12] [22] blend data and task parallelism. This is similar in spirit to the approach taken by CudaTree.

Design

To parallelize learning of a single decision tree, we considered two high-level strategies: data parallel depth-first tree construction and fine-grained task-parallel breadth-first construction.

Depth-First

Use the GPU to compute the optimal split-point for a single node of the decision tree. Each CUDA thread block is responsible for a subset of the samples from a single feature. We first perform a parallel prefix scan [8] to compute label count histograms. This is then followed by a parallel evaluation of the GINI impurity score for all possible feature thresholds. Lastly, we perform a parallel reduction to determine which feature/threshold pair has the lowest impurity score. Breadth-First Instead of constructing a single tree node for each set of kernel launches (as in the Depth-First algorithm), we can instead construct a whole level of the decision tree simultaneously. Each CUDA thread block is tasked with computing the optimal split for a single tree node in the current level. During the course of our work, we found that each of these techniques has a " sweet-spot " in which it performs well. The Depth-First algorithm is efficient during the early stages of tree construction , when large numbers of examples are being processed. As trees become deeper, however, the overhead of invoking GPU kernels to evaluate small numbers of samples becomes dominant. Breadth-first construction is less efficient at the top of a tree but can significantly decrease the kernel launch overhead by processing many sites on a tree at the same time. It seems natural to combine the strengths of both strategies into a hybrid tree construction algorithm.

Hybrid

This strategy starts tree construction using the Depth-First algorithm, but finishes growing smaller sub-trees using the Breadth-First algorithm. The crossover point between Depth-First and Breadth-First is determined by a linear model whose parameters are estimated from performance on randomly generated data. Finally, for comparison, we consider the coarse-grained task parallelism used by multi-core CPU implementations:

Coarse Task Parallel

In imitation of the usual multi-CPU task parallelism, this algorithm uses a single CUDA thread block to build each tree of the ensemble. The actual tree induction is performed using a sequential recursive algorithm similar to that used by scikitlearn . Recursion on the GPU is implemented with a manually managed stack of sample index ranges. At first, we attempted to use a fixed number of samples as the switching parameter. Switch-over points between 2000 and 25,000 samples all tend to perform better than scikit-learn, whereas using thresholds significantly outside this range severely degrades performance. However, we observed that no single fixed parameter yields optimal performance across different datasets. In addition to the complexity of the prediction task at hand (which often implicitly determines tree height), the performance of GPU decision tree learning depends on the number of samples in a dataset, along with the number of classes and features. To better incorporate these properties of a dataset, we cast the problem of determining an optimal crossover parameter as regression. We generated 75 different synthetic datasets with the number of samples ranging from 20,000 to 250,000, the number of categories between 2 and 500, and the number of features between 8 and 512. We trained a CudaTree forest on each dataset with ten transition parameters between 1000 and 30,000 samples. The transition parameter with the shortest running time was then recorded as a target output (associated with dataset characteristics). Estimating ordinary least squares coefficients results in the following formula for the Depth-First vs. Breadth-First transition: 3702 + 1.58c + 0.0577n + 21.84f where c is the number of classes, n is the number of samples, and f is the number of features considered at each split. Though this formula was estimated from performance on randomly generated data, in our experience it results in reasonable switch-over points for real data.

Implementation

All of the above algorithms were written in Python using PyCUDA [9] to compile GPU kernels and transfer data to/from the GPU. Numerically intensive computations on the host were accelerated using Parakeet [19], a runtime compiler for numerical Python. The source for the CudaTree is available online at https://github.com/EasonLiao/CudaTree. 4 Evaluation

Test Setup

All tests were conducted on two machines with 6-core Xeon E5-2630 processors and 24GB of memory. One machine had an NVIDIA Tesla C2075 GPU (448 cores at 1.15GHz) and the other had a GTX Titan (2,688 cores at 836MHz). The software used was Ubuntu Linux (12.10), Python (2.7.5), NumPy (1.7.1), scikit-learn (0.14), wiseRF (1.5.11), PyCUDA (2013.1.1) and Parakeet (0.17.1). All the Random Forest implementations below were trained with 100 trees grown to full height (no early stopping criteria). Every Random Forest was configured to evaluate √ n features per split (where n is the total number of features in a dataset).

Comparison of GPU Algorithms

We compared the performance of our four GPU learning algorithms as we vary both the number of trees 1 and the number of features 2. In both experiments, Hybrid Parallelism is faster than the alternative GPU algorithms, so we will not focus on them any further. 20 120 # Trees 0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.

0

Speedup over scikit-learn Depth-First Breadth-Frist Hybrid Task Parallel Figure 1: Speedup relative to scikit-learn over varying numbers of trees when learning on the raw pixel data of the CIFAR-10 dataset. 10 100 1000 # Features 0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.

0

Speedup over scikit-learn Figure 2: Speedup relative to scikit-learn on varying numbers of features on a synthetic random dataset with 50k samples.

Comparison against CPU algorithms

We compared the performance of our GPU algorithm with scikit-learn and wiseRF on the six datasets described in Table 1. We tested CudaTree on both a latest generation NVIDIA GTX Titan graphics card and an older Tesla C2075. In addition, we created a heterogeneous Random Forest implementation which trains simultaneously trains using both CudaTree and a multi-core Random Forest library. We tested this heterogeneous implementation on the Titan GPU running concurrently with wiseRF on 6 CPU cores. The results of this comparison are shown in Table 2. Across the six datasets, CudaTree is 1.8x -7.6x faster than scikit-learn and for the four larger datasets, also faster than wiseRF. Combining CudaTree with wiseRF yields significant improvements over the performance of either library individually. DATASET SAMPLES FEATURES CATEGORIES DESCRIPTION ImageNet subset 10k 4,096 10 Output from conv. layer of a CNN [11] CIFAR-100 50k 3,072 100 Raw pixel values of images [10] covertype 581k 57 7 Forest cover data from UCI [2] poker 1M 11 10 Poker hands [5] Data from KDD Cup '99 [24] ImageNet subset 23s 50s 27s 55s 25s CIFAR-100 160s 502s 197s 568s 94s covertype 107s 463s 67s 125s 52s poker 117s 415s 59s 122s 58s PAMAP2 1,066s 7,630s 934s 1,636s 757s intrusion 667s 1,528s 199s 400s 153s Table 2: Random Forest Training Times

Conclusion

We compared four different approaches to Random Forest construction on the GPU and found Hybrid parallelism to be faster than task or data parallelism alone. We then compared the performance of our hybrid parallel algorithm to two commonly used multi-core Random Forest libraries: scikitlearn and wiseRF. On all six datasets used, CudaTree was able to construct a 100 tree Random Forest faster than scikit-learn. Furthermore, on the four larger datasets, CudaTree was faster than wiseRF. When we combined CudaTree with wiseRF and used both simultaneously, the training times on the five larger datasets were significantly lower than any individual implementation. The ability to efficiently construct decision trees on the GPU opens up interesting avenues for future work. It is possible to use the same techniques to accelerate decision tree boosting algorithms, which thus far have been often relegated to single core CPU implementations. Furthermore, the basic design of CudaTree should work well across multiple GPUs, as well as multiple machines.