Thrombin and thrombin receptor agonist peptide induce early events of T cell activation and synergize with TCR cross-linking for CD69 expression and interleukin 2 production. 
Thrombin stimulation of the T leukemic cell line Jurkat induced a transient increase in [Ca2+]i. Proteolytic activity of the enzyme was required for this effect since diisopropyl fluorophosphate-thrombin failed to increase [Ca2+]i. Furthermore, hirudin and anti-thrombin III inhibited the thrombin-induced [Ca2+]i rise in Jurkat T cells. A synthetic thrombin receptor agonist peptide (TRP) of 7 residues (SFLLRNP) was found to be as effective as thrombin for [Ca2+]i mobilization, and both agonists induced Ca2+ release exclusively from internal stores. Thrombin stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins of molecular mass 40, 42, 70, 120, and 130 kDa. There was a good correlation between thrombin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the latter three proteins and Ca2+ mobilization. Thrombin and TRP also caused translocation of protein kinase C from the cytosol to the plasma membrane. As a likely consequence of these events, thrombin activated the nuclear factor NF-kB. Several cell lines of hematopoietic origin including the leukemic T cell line HPB.ALL and the erythroleukemic cell line K562 were responsive to thrombin, whereas others such as THP1, a myelomonocytic cell line, and BL2, a Burkitt lymphoma were refractory to thrombin or TRP stimulation. The magnitude of the thrombin response in the different cell types paralleled the expression of the thrombin receptor mRNA. We found that activation of Jurkat T cells by a combination of phytohemagglutinin and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate led to a dramatic inhibition of thrombin receptor mRNA expression and to a concomitant loss of the thrombin response. Finally, we demonstrate that thrombin and TRP enhanced CD69 expression and interleukin 2 production induced by T cell receptor cross-linking in both Jurkat T cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes. These findings highlight the role of thrombin as a potential regulator of T lymphocyte activation.
