0003674	name:Name:molecular_function	name:Synonym:molecular function	name:Synonym:molecular function unknown	info:Definition:Elemental activities, such as catalysis or binding, describing the actions of a gene product at the molecular level. A given gene product may exhibit one or more molecular functions.
0000988	name:Name:protein binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with two or more protein molecules, or a protein and another macromolecule or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0000989	name:Name:transcription factor binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001007	name:Name:RNA polymerase III transcription factor binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase III transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001026	name:Name:TFIIIB-type transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:RNA polymerase III recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase III (Pol III) complex, typically composed of seventeen subunits, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, Once recruited to an RNA polymerase III promoter by one or more other transcription factors, binds to DNA, recruits RNA polymerase III and facilitates the transition from the closed to the open complex.
0001076	name:Name:RNA polymerase II transcription factor binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase II transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001083	name:Name:RNA polymerase II basal transcription factor binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a basal RNA polymerase II transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001104	name:Name:RNA polymerase II transcription cofactor activity	name:Synonym:RNA polymerase II transcription mediator activity	name:Synonym:RNA polymerase II transcriptional co-regulator	name:Synonym:RNA polymerase II transcriptional cofactor activity	name:Synonym:thyroid receptor-associated protein	name:Synonym:TRAP protein	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) regulatory transcription factor and also with the RNAP II basal transcription machinery in order to modulate transcription. Cofactors generally do not bind DNA, but rather mediate protein-protein interactions between regulatory transcription factors and the basal RNAP II transcription machinery.
0001082	name:Name:RNA polymerase I transcription factor binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase I transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001134	name:Name:transcription factor recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific transcription factor, which may be a single protein or a complex, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, recruiting that specific transcription factor to the transcription machinery complex and thus permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001010	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to a specific DNA sequence and recruiting another transcription factor to the DNA in order to modulate transcription. The recruited factor may bind DNA directly, or may be colocalized via protein-protein interactions.
0001135	name:Name:RNA polymerase II transcription factor recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to an RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) transcription factor and recruiting it to the transcription machinery complex in order to modulate transcription by RNAP II.
0001153	name:Name:RNA polymerase III transcription factor recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to an RNA polymerase III (RNAP III) transcription factor and recruiting it to the transcription machinery complex in order to modulate transcription by RNAP III.
0003712	name:Name:transcription cofactor activity	name:Synonym:transcriptional co-regulator	name:Synonym:transcriptional cofactor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a regulatory transcription factor and also with the basal transcription machinery in order to modulate transcription. Cofactors generally do not bind DNA, but rather mediate protein-protein interactions between regulatory transcription factors and the basal transcription machinery.
0003713	name:Name:transcription coactivator activity	name:Synonym:transcription co-activator activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a activating transcription factor and also with the basal transcription machinery in order to increase the frequency, rate or extent of transcription. Cofactors generally do not bind DNA, but rather mediate protein-protein interactions between activating transcription factors and the basal transcription machinery.
0003714	name:Name:transcription corepressor activity	name:Synonym:transcription co-repressor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a repressing transcription factor and also with the basal transcription machinery in order to stop, prevent, or reduce the frequency, rate or extent of transcription. Cofactors generally do not bind DNA, but rather mediate protein-protein interactions between repressive transcription factors and the basal transcription machinery.
0016989	name:Name:sigma factor antagonist activity	name:Synonym:anti-sigma factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to a sigma factor and stopping, preventing or reducing the rate of its transcriptional activity.
0043856	name:Name:anti-sigma factor antagonist activity	name:Synonym:anti-anti-sigma factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to an anti-sigma factor and stopping, preventing or reducing the rate of its activity.
0000990	name:Name:core RNA polymerase binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0000991	name:Name:core RNA polymerase II binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase II (Pol II) complex, typically composed of twelve subunits, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, in order to modulate transcription. A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0001139	name:Name:core RNA polymerase II recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase II (Pol II) complex, typically composed of twelve subunits, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way in order to facilitate the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of proteins on an RNA polymerase II promoter DNA to form the transcriptional preinitiation complex (PIC), the formation of which is a prerequisite for transcription by RNA polymerase.
0000995	name:Name:core RNA polymerase III binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase III (Pol III) complex, typically composed of seventeen subunits, and with another protein, macromolecule, or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way, A protein binding transcription factor may or may not also interact with the template nucleic acid (either DNA or RNA) as well.
0000996	name:Name:core DNA-dependent RNA polymerase binding promoter specificity activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a DNA-dependent core RNA polymerase to form a holoenzyme complex and also, while present in the holoenzyme, interacting with promoter sequences in order to confer sequence specific recognition of promoter DNA sequence motifs.
0016987	name:Name:sigma factor activity	name:Synonym:sigma transcription factor	info:Definition:A sigma factor is the promoter specificity subunit of eubacterial-type multisubunit RNA polymerases, those whose core subunit composition is often described as alpha(2)-beta-beta-prime. (This type of multisubunit RNA polymerase complex is known to be found in eubacteria and plant plastids). Although sigma does not bind DNA on its own, when combined with the core to form the holoenzyme, this binds specifically to promoter sequences, with the sigma factor making sequence specific contacts with the promoter elements. The sigma subunit is released from the elongating form of the polymerase and is thus free to act catalytically for multiple RNA polymerase core enzymes.
0034246	name:Name:mitochondrial RNA polymerase binding promoter specificity activity	name:Synonym:mitochondrial polymerase transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:mitochondrial transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:mitochondrial transcription initiation factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a mitochondrial RNA polymerase to form a holoenzyme complex and also, while present in the holoenzyme, interacting with promoter sequences in order to confer sequence specific recognition of mitochondrial promoter DNA sequence motifs.
0001071	name:Name:nucleic acid binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a DNA or RNA sequence in order to modulate transcription. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001070	name:Name:RNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA sequence in order to modulate transcription. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001072	name:Name:RNA binding transcription antitermination factor activity	info:Definition:Binds to RNA, typically within the nascent RNA transcript, to promote readthrough of a transcription termination site and thus extending the length of the RNA transcript produced. Examples of antitermination factors which bind the nascent RNA include the lambda N protein and the HIV-1 tat protein.
0003700	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0000981	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding RNA polymerase II transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase II. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0000982	name:Name:RNA polymerase II core promoter proximal region sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is in cis with and relatively close to a core promoter for RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) in order to modulate transcription by RNAP II.
0000983	name:Name:RNA polymerase II core promoter sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in an RNA polymerase II (Pol II) core promoter, the region composed of the transcription start site and binding sites for transcription factors of the Pol II basal transcription machinery, in order to modulate transcription by Pol II. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0003705	name:Name:sequence-specific enhancer binding RNA polymerase II transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Functions to initiate or regulate RNA polymerase II transcription by binding an enhancer region of DNA.
0001011	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding RNA polymerase recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence and recruiting RNA polymerase to the DNA in order to form the preinitiation complex (PIC).
0001034	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding RNA polymerase III transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase III. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001004	name:Name:RNA polymerase III promoter sequence-specific DNA binding TFIIIB recruiting transcription factor activity	info:Definition:The function of binding to a specific DNA sequence motif in an RNA polymerase III (Pol III) promoter in order to recruit the Pol III recruiting factor TFIIIB to the promoter.
0001073	name:Name:DNA binding transcription antitermination factor activity	info:Definition:Binds to DNA, typically within region of the promoter and transcribed region, to promote readthrough of a transcription termination site and thus extending the length of the RNA transcript produced. Examples of antitermination factors which bind DNA include the lambda Q protein.
0001130	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding bacterial-type RNA polymerase transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription by bacterial-type RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001131	name:Name:bacterial-type RNA polymerase core promoter proximal region sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is in cis with and relatively close to a core promoter for a bacterial-type RNA polymerase in order to modulate transcription by bacterial-type RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001149	name:Name:bacterial-type RNA polymerase termination site sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is a termination site for bacterial-type RNA polymerase in order to promote transcription termination by bacterial-type RNA polymerase.
0001151	name:Name:bacterial-type RNA polymerase transcription enhancer sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is a bacterial-type enhancer region in order to activate transcription by bacterial-type RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex. Enhancers for sigma-54 holoenzymes are typically located 80 to 150 base pairs upstream from the transcription start site. Some transcription units dependent on sigma-70 holoenzymes may also include enhancer sequences.
0001142	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding mitochondrial RNA polymerase transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription by mitochondrial RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001143	name:Name:mitochondrial RNA polymerase core promoter sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence that is part of the core promoter for mitochondrial RNA polymerase in order to modulate transcription by mitochondrial RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001144	name:Name:mitochondrial RNA polymerase core promoter proximal region sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is in cis with and relatively close to a core promoter for a mitochondrial RNA polymerase in order to modulate transcription by mitochondrial RNA polymerase. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001146	name:Name:mitochondrial RNA polymerase terminator site sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sequence of DNA that is a terminator for mitochondrial RNA polymerase in order to promote transcription termination by mitochondrial RNA polymerase.
0001167	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding RNA polymerase I transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific DNA sequence in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase I. The transcription factor may or may not also interact selectively with a protein or macromolecular complex.
0001168	name:Name:RNA polymerase I upstream control element sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the upstream control element (UCE, or alternately referred to as the upstream element, UE), a sequence of DNA that is in cis with and relatively close to a core promoter for RNA polymerase I in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase I.
0001169	name:Name:RNA polymerase I core promoter sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the regulatory region composed of the transcription start site and binding sites for transcription factors of the RNA polymerase I transcription machinery in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase I.
0001170	name:Name:RNA polymerase I enhancer sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a RNA polymerase I (Pol I) enhancer in order to modulate transcription by RNA polymerase I.
0003706	name:Name:ligand-regulated transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Functions to enable the transcription of specific, or specific sets, of genes by RNA polymerase II in response to a ligand.
0003824	name:Name:catalytic activity	name:Synonym:enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a biochemical reaction at physiological temperatures. In biologically catalyzed reactions, the reactants are known as substrates, and the catalysts are naturally occurring macromolecular substances known as enzymes. Enzymes possess specific binding sites for substrates, and are usually composed wholly or largely of protein, but RNA that has catalytic activity (ribozyme) is often also regarded as enzymatic.
0000150	name:Name:recombinase activity	name:Synonym:strand transferase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the identification and base-pairing of homologous sequences between single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA.
0000384	name:Name:first spliceosomal transesterification activity	name:Synonym:lariat formation, 5'-splice site cleavage	info:Definition:Catalysis of the first transesterification reaction of spliceosomal mRNA splicing. The intron branch site adenosine is the nucleophile attacking the 5' splice site, resulting in cleavage at this position. In cis splicing, this is the step that forms a lariat structure of the intron RNA, while it is still joined to the 3' exon.
0000386	name:Name:second spliceosomal transesterification activity	name:Synonym:3'-splice site cleavage, exon ligation	name:Synonym:lariat formation, 5'-splice site cleavage	info:Definition:Catalysis of the second transesterification reaction of spliceosomal mRNA splicing. Ligation of the two exons occurs via a transesterification reaction where the free 3'-hydroxyl group of the 5' exon is the nucleophile attacking the 3' splice site. Non-expressed sequences are now detached from the exons. In cis splicing, the intron is in a lariat structure.
0004133	name:Name:glycogen debranching enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of branch points in branched glycogen polymers.
0004134	name:Name:4-alpha-glucanotransferase activity	name:Synonym:1,4-alpha-D-glucan:1,4-alpha-D-glucan 4-alpha-D-glycosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:amylomaltase activity	name:Synonym:D-enzyme activity	name:Synonym:debranching enzyme maltodextrin glycosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dextrin glycosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dextrin transglycosylase activity	name:Synonym:disproportionating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:oligo-1,4-1,4-glucantransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a segment of a (1,4)-alpha-D-glucan to a new 4-position in an acceptor, which may be glucose or (1,4)-alpha-D-glucan.
0004135	name:Name:amylo-alpha-1,6-glucosidase activity	name:Synonym:amylo-1,6-glucosidase activity	name:Synonym:amylopectin 1,6-glucosidase activity	name:Synonym:dextrin 6-alpha-D-glucosidase activity	name:Synonym:dextrin-1,6-glucosidase activity	name:Synonym:glycogen phosphorylase-limit dextrin alpha-1,6-glucohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of (1,6)-alpha-D-glucosidic branch linkages in glycogen phosphorylase limit dextrin. Limit dextrin is the highly branched core that remains after exhaustive treatment of glycogen with glycogen phosphorylase. It is formed because these enzymes cannot hydrolyze the 1,6 glycosidic linkages present.
0019156	name:Name:isoamylase activity	name:Synonym:debranching enzyme activity	name:Synonym:glycogen alpha-1,6-glucanohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of alpha-(1,6)-D-glucosidic branch linkages in glycogen, amylopectin and their beta-limits dextrins.
0004803	name:Name:transposase activity	name:Synonym:P-element encoded transposase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transposition of transposable elements or transposons. Transposases are involved in site-specific DNA recombination required for transposition in bacteria and other organisms.
0008265	name:Name:Mo-molybdopterin cofactor sulfurase activity	name:Synonym:Mo-molybdopterin cofactor sulphurase activity	name:Synonym:molybdopterin cofactor sulfurase activity	name:Synonym:molybdopterin synthase sulfurylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the sulfurylation of the desulfo form of molybdenum cofactor (MoCo), a cofactor required for the activity of some enzymes, such as aldehyde oxidase.
0008641	name:Name:small protein activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:ubiquitin-like activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of small proteins, such as ubiquitin or ubiquitin-like proteins, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0004839	name:Name:ubiquitin activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:E1	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a protein L-lysine + a ubiquitin + ATP = a protein-N-ubiquityl-lysine + AMP + diphosphate. This reaction is the activation of the C-terminal carboxyl group of ubiquitin by the formation of a high-energy thiolester bond in an ATP-dependent manner.
0019778	name:Name:APG12 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier APG12, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0019779	name:Name:APG8 activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:APG7	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier APG8, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0019780	name:Name:FAT10 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier FAT10, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0019781	name:Name:NEDD8 activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:RUB1 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the initiation of the NEDD8 (RUB1) conjugation cascade.
0019782	name:Name:ISG15 activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:UBE1L	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier ISG15, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0019948	name:Name:SUMO activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:SMT3 activating enzyme	name:Synonym:SUMO E1 activator enzyme	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the proteolytically processed small ubiquitin-related modifier SUMO, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0042292	name:Name:URM1 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier URM1, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0042293	name:Name:Hub1 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier Hub1, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0071566	name:Name:UFM1 activating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the activation of the small ubiquitin-related modifier UFM1, through the formation of an ATP-dependent high-energy thiolester bond.
0008907	name:Name:integrase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the integration of one segment of DNA into another.
0008979	name:Name:prophage integrase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the integration of prophage DNA into a target DNA molecule, usually a bacterial chromosome.
0009037	name:Name:tyrosine-based site-specific recombinase activity	name:Synonym:site-specific tyrosine recombinase activity	name:Synonym:tyrosine recombinase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of new phosphodiester bonds between a pair of short, unique DNA target sequences; occurs through a phosphotyrosyl intermediate in which the target sequence is first cleaved by the nucleophilic attack by a tyrosine in the active site.
0008987	name:Name:quinolinate synthetase A activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: iminoaspartate + dihydroxy-acetone-phosphate = quinolinate + 2 H2O + phosphate.
0009009	name:Name:site-specific recombinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of new phosphodiester bonds between a pair of short, unique DNA target sequences.
0009975	name:Name:cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a ring closure reaction.
0003963	name:Name:RNA-3'-phosphate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:RNA cyclase activity	name:Synonym:RNA-3'-phosphate:RNA ligase (cyclizing, AMP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + RNA 3'-terminal-phosphate = AMP + diphosphate + RNA terminal-2',3'-cyclic-phosphate.
0004016	name:Name:adenylate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:3',5'-cyclic AMP synthetase activity	name:Synonym:adenyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:adenylyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:adenylylcyclase activity	name:Synonym:ATP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:ATP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing; 3',5'-cyclic-AMP-forming) activity	name:Synonym:ATP pyrophosphate-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cAMP generating peptide activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP = 3',5'-cyclic AMP + diphosphate.
0008294	name:Name:calcium- and calmodulin-responsive adenylate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:calcium- and calmodulin-responsive adenylyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:calcium/calmodulin-responsive adenylate cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP = 3',5'-cyclic AMP + diphosphate, stimulated by calcium-bound calmodulin.
0004383	name:Name:guanylate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:GTP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:GTP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing; 3',5'-cyclic-GMP-forming) activity	name:Synonym:guanyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:guanylyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:receptor guanylate cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: GTP = 3',5'-cyclic GMP + diphosphate.
0009976	name:Name:tocopherol cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alkene group + alcohol group on same molecule = cyclic ether. Substrates are 2-methyl-6-phytyl-1,4- hydroquinone (forms delta-tocopherol) and 2,3-dimethyl-5-phytyl-1,4-hydroquinone (forms gamma-tocopherol).
0033190	name:Name:solanapyrone synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cyclization of double bonds in prosolanapyrone II to form (-)-solanapyrone A.
0034012	name:Name:FAD-AMP lyase (cyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:FAD AMP-lyase (cyclic-FMN-forming) activity	name:Synonym:FAD AMP-lyase (riboflavin-cyclic-4',5'-phosphate-forming) activity	name:Synonym:FMN cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: FAD = AMP + riboflavin cyclic-4',5'-phosphate.
0034072	name:Name:squalene cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: squalene = triterpene.
0034073	name:Name:tetrahymanol cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: squalene = tetrahymanol.
0051007	name:Name:squalene-hopene cyclase activity	name:Synonym:squalene mutase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:squalene:hopene cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: squalene = hop-22(29)-ene.
0035439	name:Name:halimadienyl-diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:halima-5(6),13-dien-15-yl-diphosphate lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:halimadienyl diphosphate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: geranylgeranyl diphosphate = halima-5(6),13-dien-15-yl diphosphate.
0045435	name:Name:lycopene epsilon cyclase activity	name:Synonym:lycopene cyclase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cyclization of an epsilon ring at one end of the lycopene molecule (psi, psi-carotene) to form delta-carotene (epsilon, psi-carotene).
0045436	name:Name:lycopene beta cyclase activity	name:Synonym:crtL	name:Synonym:lycopene cyclase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cyclization of beta rings at one or both ends of the lycopene molecule (psi, psi-carotene) to form gamma-carotene or the bicyclic beta-carotene (beta, beta-carotene), respectively.
0046423	name:Name:allene-oxide cyclase activity	name:Synonym:(9Z)-(13S)-12,13-epoxyoctadeca-9,11,15-trienoate isomerase (cyclizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (9Z,13S,15Z)-12,13-epoxyoctadeca-9,11,15-trienoate = (15Z)-12-oxophyto-10,15-dienoate.
0047396	name:Name:glycosylphosphatidylinositol diacylglycerol-lyase activity	name:Synonym:(glycosyl)phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C activity	name:Synonym:6-(alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol diacyl-sn-glycerol-lyase [6-(alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1D-myo-inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate-forming]	name:Synonym:6-(alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol diacylglycerol-lyase (1,2-cyclic-phosphate-forming) activity	name:Synonym:glycosyl inositol phospholipid anchor-hydrolyzing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:glycosylphosphatidylinositol-phospholipase C activity	name:Synonym:glycosylphosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C activity	name:Synonym:GPI-PLC activity	name:Synonym:GPI-specific phospholipase C activity	name:Synonym:variant-surface-glycoprotein phospholipase C activity	name:Synonym:VSG-lipase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 6-(alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol = 1,2-diacyl-sn-glycerol + 6-(alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1D-myo-inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate.
0047768	name:Name:carboxy-cis,cis-muconate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:3-carboxy-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate lactonizing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:3-carboxymuconate cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-carboxy-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate = 3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate.
0047805	name:Name:cytidylate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:3',5'-cyclic-CMP synthase activity	name:Synonym:3'5'-cyclic-CMP synthase activity	name:Synonym:CTP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:CTP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing; 3',5'-cyclic-CMP-forming)	name:Synonym:cytidyl cyclase activity	name:Synonym:cytidylyl cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: CTP = 3',5'-cyclic CMP + diphosphate + H(+).
0047820	name:Name:D-glutamate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:D-glutamate hydro-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:D-glutamate hydro-lyase (cyclizing; 5-oxo-D-proline-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glutamate = 5-oxo-D-proline + H(2)O.
0047926	name:Name:geranyl-diphosphate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:(+)-bornyl-diphosphate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:(+)-bornylpyrophosphate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:bornyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:bornyl pyrophosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:bornyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: geranyl diphosphate = (2S)-bornyl diphosphate.
0050230	name:Name:purine imidazole-ring cyclase activity	name:Synonym:DNA-4,6-diamino-5-formamidopyrimidine 8-C,9-N-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:DNA-4,6-diamino-5-formamidopyrimidine 8-C,9-N-lyase (cyclizing; DNA-adenine-forming)	name:Synonym:DNA-4,6-diamino-5-formamidopyrimidine C8-N9-lyase (cyclizing; DNA-adenine-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: DNA 4,6-diamino-5-formamidopyrimidine = DNA adenine + H2O.
0052604	name:Name:delta-tocopherol cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-methyl-6-phytyl-1,4-benzoquinone = delta-tocopherol.
0052605	name:Name:gamma-tocopherol cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,3-dimethyl-6-phytyl-1,4-benzoquinone = gamma-tocopherol.
0080015	name:Name:sabinene synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: geranyl diphosphate = sabinene + diphosphate.
0080016	name:Name:(-)-E-beta-caryophyllene synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-trans,6-trans-farnesyl diphosphate = (-)-E-beta-caryophyllene + diphosphate.
0080017	name:Name:alpha-humulene synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-trans,6-trans-farnesyl diphosphate = alpha-humulene + diphosphate.
0010280	name:Name:UDP-L-rhamnose synthase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose 3,5-epimerase-4-reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: UDP-D-glucose + NADPH + H+ = UDP-L-rhamnose + NADP+ + H2O.
0016217	name:Name:N-ethylammeline chlorohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: deethylsimazine + H2O = N-ethylammeline + chloride + H+.
0016491	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other substrates	name:Synonym:redox activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction, a reversible chemical reaction in which the oxidation state of an atom or atoms within a molecule is altered. One substrate acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and becomes oxidized, while the other acts as hydrogen or electron acceptor and becomes reduced.
0000170	name:Name:sphingosine hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of sphingolipid long chain bases.
0001512	name:Name:dihydronicotinamide riboside quinone reductase activity	name:Synonym:1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-1,4-dihydronicotinamide:quinone oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:N-ribosyldihydronicotinamide dehydrogenase (quinone) activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 2 activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase-2	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase2	name:Synonym:NQO(2) activity	name:Synonym:NQO2	name:Synonym:NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2 activity	name:Synonym:QR2 activity	name:Synonym:quinone reductase 2 activity	name:Synonym:ribosyldihydronicotinamide dehydrogenase (quinone) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)-1,4-dihydronicotinamide + a quinone = 1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)nicotinamide + a hydroquinone.
0003826	name:Name:alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction involving an alpha-ketoacid.
0004154	name:Name:dihydropterin oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a 7,8-dihydropteridine + O2 = a pterin + hydrogen peroxide.
0004497	name:Name:monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the incorporation of one atom from molecular oxygen into a compound and the reduction of the other atom of oxygen to water.
0004506	name:Name:squalene monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:squalene 2,3-oxidocyclase activity	name:Synonym:squalene epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:squalene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:squalene oxydocyclase activity	name:Synonym:squalene,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (2,3-epoxidizing)	name:Synonym:squalene-2,3-epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:squalene-2,3-epoxide cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of a 2,3-epoxide in squalene.
0008389	name:Name:coumarin 7-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2A5	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: coumarin + O2 + NADPH + H+ = hydroxycoumarin + H2O + NADP+.
0008391	name:Name:arachidonic acid monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2B19	info:Definition:Catalysis of the incorporation of one atom from molecular oxygen into arachidonic acid and the reduction of the other atom of oxygen to water.
0008395	name:Name:steroid hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2G1	name:Synonym:olfactory-specific steroid hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of a hydroxyl group on a steroid by incorporation of oxygen from O2.
0008399	name:Name:naphthalene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2F2	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of naphthalene to naphthalene 1,2-oxide.
0008401	name:Name:retinoic acid 4-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP261	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of retinoic acid to 4-hydroxy-retinoic acid.
0008403	name:Name:25-hydroxycholecalciferol-24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:25-hydroxyvitamin D3 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP24	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of C-24 of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25-hydroxyvitamin D3) to form 24(R),25-dihydroxycholecalciferol.
0010291	name:Name:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of C3-hydroxylation of the beta-ring of various carotenes.
0016703	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on single donors with incorporation of molecular oxygen, incorporation of one atom of oxygen (internal monooxygenases or internal mixed function oxidases)	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from one donor, and one oxygen atom is incorporated into a donor.
0016709	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, NADH or NADPH as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from NADH or NADPH and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016712	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced flavin or flavoprotein as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	name:Synonym:aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:aryl-4-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome p450 activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP19	name:Synonym:flavoprotein monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:flavoprotein-linked monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:microsomal monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:microsomal P-450	name:Synonym:microsomal p450 activity	name:Synonym:substrate,reduced-flavoprotein:oxygen oxidoreductase (RH-hydroxylating or -epoxidizing)	name:Synonym:unspecific monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:xenobiotic monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from reduced flavin or flavoprotein and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016713	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced iron-sulfur protein as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced iron-sulphur protein as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from reduced iron-sulfur protein and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016714	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced pteridine as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from reduced pteridine and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016715	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, reduced ascorbate as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from reduced ascorbate and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016716	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, another compound as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from each of two donors, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0018529	name:Name:nitrilotriacetate monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nitrilotriacetate + NADH + H+ + O2 = NAD+ + H2O + glyoxylate + iminodiacetate.
0018591	name:Name:methyl tertiary butyl ether 3-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:MTBE 3-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methyl tert-butyl ether + 1/2 O2 = tert-butyl alcohol + formaldehyde.
0018592	name:Name:4-nitrocatechol 4-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-nitrocatechol + O2 + 4 e- + 3 H+ = H2O + nitrite + 1,2,4-benzenetriol.
0018593	name:Name:4-chlorophenoxyacetate monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-chlorophenoxyacetate + 1/2 O2 = glyoxylate + 4-chlorophenol.
0018594	name:Name:tert-butyl alcohol 2-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tert-butyl alcohol + 1/2 O2 = 2-methyl-2-hydroxy-1-propanol.
0018595	name:Name:alpha-pinene monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-pinene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + pinocarveol.
0018597	name:Name:ammonia monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the oxidation of alkanes (up to C8) to alcohols and alkenes (up to C5) to epoxides and alcohols in the presence of ammonium ions.
0018599	name:Name:2-hydroxyisobutyrate 3-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxyisobutyrate + 1/2 O2 = 2,3-dihydroxy-2-methyl propionate.
0018679	name:Name:dibenzothiophene-5,5-dioxide monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dibenzothiophene-5,5-dioxide + O2 + 2 NADH + H+ = 2 NAD+ + H2O + 2'-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sulfinate.
0018690	name:Name:4-methoxybenzoate monooxygenase (O-demethylating) activity	name:Synonym:4-methoxybenzoate 4-monooxygenase (O-demethylating)	name:Synonym:4-methoxybenzoate monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:4-methoxybenzoate O-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:4-methoxybenzoate,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (O-demethylating)	name:Synonym:p-anisic O-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:piperonylate-4-O-demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-methoxybenzoate + AH(2) + O(2) = 4-hydroxybenzoate + A + formaldehyde + H(2)O.
0019135	name:Name:deoxyhypusine monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:deoxyhypusine dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:deoxyhypusine hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:deoxyhypusine,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (2-hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:DOHH activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: protein N6-(4-aminobutyl)-L-lysine + donor-H2 + O2 = protein N6-((R)-4-amino-2-hydroxybutyl)-L-lysine + acceptor + H2O.
0031172	name:Name:ornithine N5-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:L-ornithine 5-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-ornithine + O2 + H+ = N5-hydroxy-L-ornithine + H2O.
0045289	name:Name:luciferin monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:luciferase activity	name:Synonym:luciferase monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the generalized reaction: luciferin + O2 = oxidized luciferin + CO2 + light. There may be additional substrates and reactants involved in the reaction. The reaction results in light emission as luciferin returns to the ground state after enzymatic oxidation.
0046409	name:Name:p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP98A3	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: shikimate or quinate ester of p-coumaric acid + NADPH + H+ + O2 = caffeic acid conjugate (caffeoyl shikimic acid or chlorogenic acid) + H2O + NADP+.
0046424	name:Name:ferulate 5-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ferulic acid + NADPH + H+ + O2 = 5-hydroxyferulic acid + H2O + NADP+.
0047096	name:Name:androst-4-ene-3,17-dione monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:4-androstene-3,17-dione monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:androst-4-ene-3,17-dione 17-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:androst-4-ene-3,17-dione hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:androst-4-ene-3,17-dione-hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (13-hydroxylating, lactonizing)	name:Synonym:androstene-3,17-dione hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:androstenedione monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + androst-4-ene-3,17-dione + O(2) = A + H(2)O + testololactone.
0047097	name:Name:phylloquinone monooxygenase (2,3-epoxidizing) activity	name:Synonym:phylloquinone epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:phylloquinone,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (2,3-epoxidizing)	name:Synonym:vitamin K 2,3-epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin K epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin K1 epoxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + phylloquinone = 2,3-epoxyphylloquinone + A + H(2)O.
0047546	name:Name:2-hydroxypyridine 5-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxypyridine oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxypyridine,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (5-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxypyridine + AH(2) + O(2) = 2,5-dihydroxypyridine + A + H(2)O.
0047563	name:Name:3-hydroxybenzoate 2-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:3-HBA-2-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:3-hydroxybenzoate 2-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:3-hydroxybenzoate,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (2-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-hydroxybenzoate + AH(2) + O(2) = 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate + A + H(2)O.
0047882	name:Name:estradiol 6-beta-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol 6-beta-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol 6b-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol 6b-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol 6beta-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol 6beta-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:estradiol-17beta,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (6beta-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + estradiol-17beta + O(2) = 6beta-hydroxyestradiol-17beta + A + H(2)O.
0050056	name:Name:linalool 8-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:3,7-dimethylocta-1,6-dien-3-ol,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (8-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + linalool + O(2) = (2E)-2,6-dimethylocta-2,7-diene-1,6-diol + A + H(2)O.
0050212	name:Name:progesterone 11-alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone 11-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone 11a-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone 11alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone 11alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (11alpha-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + progesterone = 11alpha-hydroxyprogesterone + A + H(2)O.
0050214	name:Name:progesterone monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:progesterone,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + progesterone = A + H(2)O + testosterone acetate.
0050292	name:Name:steroid 9-alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 9-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 9a-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 9alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 9alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:steroid,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (9-epoxidizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + pregna-4,9(11)-diene-3,20-dione = 9,11alpha-epoxypregn-4-ene-3,20-dione + A + H(2)O.
0050603	name:Name:thiophene-2-carbonyl-CoA monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:thiophene-2-carbonyl-CoA, hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:thiophene-2-carboxyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:thiophene-2-carboxyl-CoA hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:thiophene-2-carboxyl-CoA monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + thiophene-2-carbonyl-CoA = 5-hydroxythiophene-2-carbonyl-CoA + A + H(2)O + H(+).
0052608	name:Name:echinenone 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-ring carotenoid 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: echinenone + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = 3-hydroxyechinenone + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052609	name:Name:4-ketotorulene 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-ring carotenoid 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-ketotorulene + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = 3-hydroxy-4-ketotorulene + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052610	name:Name:beta-cryptoxanthin hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-ring carotenoid 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: beta-cryptoxanthin + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = zeaxanthin + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052611	name:Name:beta-carotene 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: beta-carotene + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = beta-cryptoxanthin + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052612	name:Name:adonirubin 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-ring carotenoid 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: adonirubin + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = 3S,3'S-astaxanthin + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052613	name:Name:canthaxanthin 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carotene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:beta-ring carotenoid 3-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:carotene beta-ring hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: canthaxanthin + a reduced electron acceptor + oxygen = adonirubin + an oxidized electron acceptor + H2O.
0052694	name:Name:jasmonoyl-isoleucine-12-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: jasmonoyl-isoleucine + NADPH + H+ + O2 = 12-hydroxy-jasmonoyl-isoleucine + NADP+ + H2O.
0071614	name:Name:linoleic acid epoxygenase activity	name:Synonym:linoleic acid monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an NADPH- and oxygen-dependent reaction that converts linoleic acid to a cis-epoxyoctadecenoic acid.
0072374	name:Name:carotene epsilon hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a carotene + NADPH + O2 + H+ = a beta-ring hydroxylcarotene + NADP+ + H2O. Adds a hydroxyl group to the epsilon ring of the alpha-carotene.
0080014	name:Name:thalianol hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a thalianol = a thalian-diol. This reaction is the addition of a hydroxyl group to thalianol ((13R,14R,17E)-podioda-8,17,21-trien-3beta-ol) to create a thalian-diol ((13R,14R,17E)-podioda-8,17,21-trien-3beta,X-diol), where the hydroxyl group may be attached at one of several different available carbons in ring B or C of thalianol, indicated by the X.
0004800	name:Name:thyroxine 5'-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:acceptor:3,5,3'-triiodo-L-thyronine oxidoreductase (iodinating)	name:Synonym:diiodothyronine 5'-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:iodothyronine 5'-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:iodothyronine outer ring monodeiodinase activity	name:Synonym:L-thyroxine iodohydrolase (reducing) activity	name:Synonym:outer ring-deiodinating pathway	name:Synonym:thyroxine 5' deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:thyroxine deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:type I iodothyronine deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:type II iodothyronine deiodinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,5,3'-L-triiodo-L-thyronine + iodide + acceptor + H+ = L-thyroxine + donor-H2.
0004836	name:Name:tyramine-beta hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of tyramine to form octopamine.
0008682	name:Name:2-octoprenyl-3-methyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-octoprenyl-3-methyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone + O2 = 2-octoprenyl-3-methyl-5-hydroxy-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone.
0008748	name:Name:N-ethylmaleimide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-ethylmaleimide + 2 H+ = N-ethylsuccinimide.
0010242	name:Name:oxygen evolving activity	name:Synonym:photosynthetic water oxidation	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 H2O = O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e-. The evolution of oxygen from oxidizing water is carried out by the oxygen evolving complex in photosystem II of plants. P680+, the photochemically oxidized reaction-center chlorophyll of PSII, is a strong biological oxidant. The reduction potential of P680+ is more positive than that of water, and thus it can oxidize water to give O2 and H+ ions. The oxygen escapes as a gas while the H+ ions remain in solution inside the thylakoid vesicle.
0015002	name:Name:heme-copper terminal oxidase activity	name:Synonym:haem-copper terminal oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the four-electron reduction of dioxygen (O2) to water, coupled to generation of a proton electrochemical gradient across a membrane.
0004129	name:Name:cytochrome-c oxidase activity	name:Synonym:aa3-type cytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:ba3-type cytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:caa3-type cytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:cbb3-type cytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:complex IV (mitochondrial electron transport) activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome a3 activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome aa3 activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome oxidase activity	name:Synonym:ferrocytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:ferrocytochrome-c:oxygen oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:indophenol oxidase	name:Synonym:indophenolase	name:Synonym:NADH cytochrome c oxidase	name:Synonym:warburg's respiratory enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4 ferrocytochrome c + O2 + 4 H+ = 4 ferricytochrome c + 2 H2O.
0008827	name:Name:cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ubiquinol + O2 = ubiquinone + 2 H2O; cytochrome O is the electron acceptor.
0009486	name:Name:cytochrome bo3 ubiquinol oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 ubiquinol + O2 + 4 H+ = 2 ubiquinone + 2 H2O + 4 H+[periplasmic space].
0015039	name:Name:NADPH-adrenodoxin reductase activity	name:Synonym:adrenodoxin reductase activity	name:Synonym:adrenodoxin-type ferredoxin reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:adrenodoxin oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: oxidized adrenodoxin + NADPH + H+ = reduced adrenodoxin + NADP+.
0015048	name:Name:phthalate dioxygenase reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of electrons between pyridine nucleotides (obligatory two-electron carriers) and hemes or (2Fe-2S) centers (obligatory one-electron carriers) in respiration, photosynthesis, and many oxygenase systems.
0016229	name:Name:steroid dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which one substrate is a sterol derivative.
0033764	name:Name:steroid dehydrogenase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD+ or NADP, and in which one substrate is a sterol derivative.
0033765	name:Name:steroid dehydrogenase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor, and in which one substrate is a sterol derivative.
0016614	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH-OH group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group act as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0004344	name:Name:glucose dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-glucose:(acceptor) 1-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:D-glucose:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:glucose dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:glucose dehydrogenase (Aspergillus) activity	name:Synonym:glucose dehydrogenase (decarboxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glucose + acceptor = D-glucono-1,5-lactone + reduced acceptor.
0004457	name:Name:lactate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the oxidation of lactate to produce pyruvate.
0008812	name:Name:choline dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:choline oxidase activity	name:Synonym:choline-cytochrome c reductase activity	name:Synonym:choline:(acceptor) 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:choline:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:choline:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + choline = AH(2) + betaine aldehyde.
0016615	name:Name:malate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reversible conversion of pyruvate or oxaloacetate to malate.
0016616	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD+ or NADP.
0016898	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome molecule.
0016899	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an oxygen molecule.
0016900	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a disulfide molecule.
0016901	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-OH group of donors, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-OH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or a similar acceptor molecule.
0018446	name:Name:pinocarveol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pinocarveol = pinocarvone + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0018447	name:Name:chloral hydrate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: chloral hydrate = 3 H+ + 2 e- + trichloroacetate, and chloral hydrate + H2 = H2O + trichloroethanol.
0018448	name:Name:hydroxymethylmethylsilanediol oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydroxymethylmethylsilanediol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = formylmethylsilanediol + 2 H2O.
0018449	name:Name:1-phenylethanol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-1-phenylethanol = acetophenone + H2.
0018450	name:Name:myrtenol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: myrtenol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 2 H2O + myrtenal.
0018466	name:Name:limonene-1,2-diol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (1S,2S,4R)-limonene-1,2-diol + DCPIP+ = DCPIPH + H+ + (1S,4R)-1-hydroxy-2-oxolimonene.
0018468	name:Name:alcohol dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:alcohol:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:alcohol:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:MDH	name:Synonym:PQQ-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:primary alcohol dehydrogenase	name:Synonym:quinohemoprotein alcohol dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:quinoprotein ethanol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a primary alcohol + acceptor = an aldehyde + reduced acceptor.
0019154	name:Name:glycolate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:glycolate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:glycolate:(acceptor) 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:glycolate:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:glycolic acid dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + glycolate = AH(2) + glyoxylate.
0031320	name:Name:hexitol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hexitol + acceptor = hexose + reduced acceptor.
0033718	name:Name:pyranose dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:PDH	name:Synonym:pyranose dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyranose-quinone oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:pyranose:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinone-dependent pyranose dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: pyranose + acceptor = 2-dehydropyranose (or 3-dehydropyranose or 2,3-didehydropyranose) + reduced acceptor, and a pyranoside + acceptor = a 3-dehydropyranoside (or 3,4-didehydropyranoside) + reduced acceptor.
0033719	name:Name:2-oxo-acid reductase activity	name:Synonym:(2R)-hydroxy-carboxylate:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:(2R)-hydroxycarboxylate-viologen-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoacid reductase activity	name:Synonym:HVOR	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a (2R)-hydroxy-carboxylate + acceptor = a 2-oxo-carboxylate + reduced acceptor.
0033720	name:Name:(S)-mandelate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(S)-2-hydroxy-2-phenylacetate:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:L(+)-mandelate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:MDH	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-2-hydroxy-2-phenylacetate + acceptor = 2-oxo-2-phenylacetate + reduced acceptor.
0033757	name:Name:glucoside 3-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-aldohexopyranoside dehydrogenase	name:Synonym:D-aldohexoside:(acceptor) 3-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:D-aldohexoside:acceptor 3-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:D-aldohexoside:cytochrome c oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:hexopyranoside-cytochrome c oxidoreductase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sucrose + acceptor = 3-dehydro-alpha-D-glucosyl-beta-D-fructofuranoside + reduced acceptor.
0034522	name:Name:cis-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2-dihydro-8-carboxynaphthalene dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2-dihydro-8-carboxynaphthalene = 1,2-dihydroxy-8-carboxynaphthalene + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034582	name:Name:3-hydroxy-4-methyloctanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-hydroxy-4-methyloctanoyl-CoA = 4-methyl-3-oxooctanoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034778	name:Name:2-hydroxy-4-isopropenylcyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxy-4-isopropenylcyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA = 4-isopropenyl-2-ketocyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034817	name:Name:cis-9,10-dihydroanthracene-9,10-diol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-9,10-dihydroanthracene-9,10-diol = 9,10-anthraquinone + 4 H+ + 4 e-.
0034821	name:Name:citronellol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: citronellol + NAD+ = citronellal + NADH + H+.
0034847	name:Name:naphthyl-2-hydroxymethyl-succinyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: naphthyl-2-hydroxymethyl-succinyl-CoA = naphthyl-2-oxomethyl-succinyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034863	name:Name:2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentanol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentanol = 2,4,4-trimethylpentanal + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034868	name:Name:2,4,4-trimethyl-3-hydroxypentanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,4-trimethyl-3-hydroxypentanoyl-CoA = 2,4,4-trimethyl-3-oxopentanoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034871	name:Name:1-hydroxy-4,4-dimethylpentan-3-one dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-hydroxy-4,4-dimethylpentan-3-one = 4,4-dimethyl-3-oxopentanal + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034891	name:Name:endosulfan diol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: endosulfan diol = endosulfan hydroxyether + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034901	name:Name:endosulfan hydroxyether dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: endosulfan hydroxyether = endosulfan lactone + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034918	name:Name:3-hydroxy-2-methylhexanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-hydroxy-2-methylhexanoyl-CoA = 2-methyl-3-oxohexanoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034944	name:Name:3-hydroxy-2,6-dimethyl-5-methylene-heptanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-hydroxy-2,6-dimethyl-5-methylene-heptanoyl-CoA + NAD+ = 2,6-dimethyl-5-methylene-3-oxo-heptanoyl-CoA + NADH+ + H+.
0042469	name:Name:versicolorin reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of versicolorin A to sterigmatocystin.
0045703	name:Name:ketoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of a ketone group to form the corresponding alcohol.
0047059	name:Name:polyvinyl-alcohol dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:polyvinyl-alcohol:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:polyvinyl-alcohol:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:PVA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: acceptor + polyvinyl alcohol = donor-H2 + oxidized polyvinyl alcohol.
0047060	name:Name:(R)-pantolactone dehydrogenase (flavin) activity	name:Synonym:(R)-pantolactone:acceptor oxidoreductase (flavin-containing)	name:Synonym:(R)-pantoyllactone dehydrogenase (flavin) activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydropantolactone reductase (flavin) activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydropantoyl-lactone reductase (flavin) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-pantolactone + A = 2-dehydropantolactone + AH(2).
0047061	name:Name:glucose-fructose oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:D-glucose:D-fructose oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-fructose + D-glucose = D-glucitol + D-glucono-1,5-lactone.
0047519	name:Name:quinate dehydrogenase (pyrroloquinoline-quinone) activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)-independent quinate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:quinate:pyrroloquinoline-quinone 3-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinate:pyrroloquinoline-quinone 5-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: quinate + pyrroloquinoline-quinone = 5-dehydroquinate + reduced pyrroloquinoline-quinone.
0047545	name:Name:2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(S)-2-hydroxyglutarate:(acceptor) 2-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:(S)-2-hydroxyglutarate:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:alpha-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (NAD+ specific)	name:Synonym:alpha-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-hydroxyglutarate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-ketoglutarate reductase activity	name:Synonym:hydroxyglutaric dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-alpha-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-alpha-hydroxyglutarate:NAD+ 2-oxidoreductase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-2-hydroxyglutarate + acceptor = 2-oxoglutarate + reduced acceptor.
0047564	name:Name:3-hydroxycyclohexanone dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:3-hydroxycyclohexanone:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-hydroxycyclohexanone + A = AH(2) + cyclohexane-1,3-dione.
0047645	name:Name:alkan-1-ol dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:alkan-1-ol:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:alkan-1-ol:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:polyethylene glycol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: primary alcohol + acceptor = aldehyde + reduced acceptor.
0047735	name:Name:cellobiose dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:CBOR activity	name:Synonym:CDH activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose dehydrogenase (quinone) activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose oxidase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose-quinone oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose:(acceptor) 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cellobiose:oxygen 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:phanerochaete chrysosporium cellobiose oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cellobiose + acceptor = cellobiono-1,5-lactone + reduced acceptor.
0047809	name:Name:D-2-hydroxy-acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-2-hydroxy-acid:(acceptor) 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxy acid dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-lactate + A = AH(2) + pyruvate.
0047833	name:Name:D-sorbitol dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:D-sorbitol dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-sorbitol:(acceptor) 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:D-sorbitol:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-sorbitol + acceptor = L-sorbose + reduced acceptor.
0047843	name:Name:dehydrogluconate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-D-gluconate:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:2-keto-D-gluconate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxogluconate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-ketogluconate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:ketogluconate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-dehydro-D-gluconate + A = 2,5-didehydro-D-gluconate + AH(2).
0047904	name:Name:fructose 5-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-fructose dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-fructose:(acceptor) 5-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:D-fructose:acceptor 5-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:fructose 5-dehydrogenase (acceptor)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-fructose + A = 5-dehydro-D-fructose + AH(2).
0047955	name:Name:glycerol dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:glycerol:(acceptor) 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:glycerol:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + glycerol = AH(2) + glycerone.
0047988	name:Name:hydroxyacid-oxoacid transhydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(S)-3-hydroxybutanoate:2-oxoglutarate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:transhydrogenase, hydroxy acid-oxo acid	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-3-hydroxybutanoate + 2-oxoglutarate = acetoacetate + (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate.
0050042	name:Name:lactate-malate transhydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(S)-lactate:oxaloacetate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:malate-lactate transhydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-lactate + oxaloacetate = malate + pyruvate.
0050238	name:Name:pyridoxine 5-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxal-5-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxin 5-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxine 5'-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxine:(acceptor) 5-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxine:acceptor 5-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxol 5-dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pyridoxine + acceptor = isopyridoxal + reduced acceptor.
0050288	name:Name:sorbose dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-sorbose:(acceptor) 5-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:L-sorbose:acceptor 5-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-sorbose + A = 5-dehydro-D-fructose + AH(2).
0050383	name:Name:uracil dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: uracil + acceptor = barbiturate + reduced acceptor.
0051990	name:Name:(R)-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate + acceptor = 2-oxoglutarate + reduced acceptor.
0016627	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0000104	name:Name:succinate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:fumarate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:fumarate reductase activity	name:Synonym:fumaric hydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:succinate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:succinate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:succinate:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:succinic acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:succinic dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:succinodehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:succinyl dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: succinate + acceptor = fumarate + reduced acceptor.
0003995	name:Name:acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:acyl CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:acyl dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA reductase activity	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA:(acceptor) 2,3-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA:acceptor 2,3-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:fatty acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:fatty-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:general acyl CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:long-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: acyl-CoA + acceptor = 2,3-dehydroacyl-CoA + reduced acceptor.
0009917	name:Name:sterol 5-alpha reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a C-5 double bond in the B ring of a sterol.
0009918	name:Name:sterol delta7 reductase activity	name:Synonym:sterol delta-7 reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-dehydroepisterol = 24-methylenecholesterol.
0016166	name:Name:phytoene dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the dehydrogenation of phytoene to produce a carotenoid intermediate such as phytofluene.
0016628	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016632	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016634	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016635	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, quinone or related compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or related compound.
0016636	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-CH group of donors, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-CH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0017150	name:Name:tRNA dihydrouridine synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tRNA-uracil + acceptor = tRNA-dihydrouridine + reduced acceptor.
0018129	name:Name:peptidyl-oxazoline dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of a peptide-linked oxazoline to oxazole.
0018136	name:Name:peptidyl-thiazoline dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of a peptide-linked thiazoline to thiazole.
0018494	name:Name:carvone reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: carvone + 2 H+ + 2 e- = dihydrocarvone.
0018495	name:Name:2-hydroxycyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxycyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA = 2 H+ + 2 e- + 2-ketocyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA.
0018496	name:Name:2,6-dihydroxycyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,6-dihydroxycyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA = 2 H+ + 2 e- + 6-oxo-2-hydroxycyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA.
0018497	name:Name:1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:DDMS dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane. 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene is also known as DDMU; 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane is also known as DDMS.
0018523	name:Name:quinoline 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinoline:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: quinoline + acceptor + H2O = isoquinolin-1(2H)-one + reduced acceptor.
0033734	name:Name:(R)-benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-benzylsuccinyl-CoA:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-benzylsuccinyl-CoA:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:BbsG	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-2-benzylsuccinyl-CoA + 2 electron-transferring flavoprotein = (E)-2-benzylidenesuccinyl-CoA + 2 reduced electron-transferring flavoprotein.
0034564	name:Name:4,4'-dihydroxy-alpha-methylstilbene dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4,4'-dihydroxy-alpha-methylstilbene + O2 = 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde + 4-hydroxyacetophenone + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034580	name:Name:4-methyloctanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-methyloctanoyl-CoA = 4-methyloct-2-enoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034787	name:Name:1-hydro-1,1a-dihydroxy-9-fluorenone dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-hydro-1,1a-dihydroxy-9-fluorenone + H2O = 2,3-dihydroxy-2'-carboxybiphenyl + 3 H+ + 2 e-.
0034826	name:Name:1,2-dihydroxy-1,2,5,6,7,8-hexyhadronaphthalene dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2,5,6,7,8-hexahydronaphthalene + NAD+ = 1,2-dihydroxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalene + NADH + H+.
0034837	name:Name:2-mercaptobenzothiazole-cis-6,7-dihydrodiol dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-mercaptobenzothiazole-cis-6,7-dihydrodiol = 6,7-dihydroxy-2-mercaptobenzothiazole + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034845	name:Name:naphthyl-2-methyl-succinyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: naphthyl-2-methyl-succinyl-CoA = naphthyl-2-methylene-succinyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034866	name:Name:2,4,4-trimethylpentanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,4-trimethylpentanoyl-CoA = 2,4,4-trimethylpent-2-enoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034916	name:Name:2-methylhexanoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-methylhexanoyl-CoA = 2-methylhex-2-enoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + e-.
0034921	name:Name:cis-4,5-dihydroxy-4,5-dihydropyrene dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-4,5-dihydroxy-4,5-dihydropyrene = 4,5-dihydroxypyrene + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034924	name:Name:cis-3,4-phenanthrenedihydrodiol-4-carboxylate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-3,4-phenanthrenedihydrodiol-4-carboxylate = 3,4-dihydroxyphenanthrene + H+ + 2 e- + CO2.
0043820	name:Name:propionyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the irreversible NADH-dependent formation of propionyl-CoA from acryloyl-CoA.
0043830	name:Name:thiol-driven fumarate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: fumarate + coenzyme M + coenzyme B = succinate + coenzyme M + coenzyme B + heterodisulfide.
0047121	name:Name:isoquinoline 1-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:isoquinoline:acceptor 1-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + H(2)O + isoquinoline = AH(2) + isoquinolin-1(2H)-one.
0047122	name:Name:quinaldate 4-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinaldic acid 4-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinoline-2-carboxylate:acceptor 4-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + H(2)O + quinaldate = AH(2) + kynurenate.
0047123	name:Name:quinoline-4-carboxylate 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:quinoline-4-carboxylate:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:quinoline-4-carboxylic acid 2-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + H(2)O + quinoline-4-carboxylate = 2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinoline-4-carboxylate + AH(2).
0047542	name:Name:2-furoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:2-furoyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:2-furoyl coenzyme A hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:2-furoyl-CoA:(acceptor) 5-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:2-furoyl-CoA:acceptor 5-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:furoyl-CoA hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-furoyl-CoA + A + H(2)O = 5-hydroxy-2-furoyl-CoA + AH(2) + H(+).
0047797	name:Name:cyclohexanone dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:cyclohexanone:(acceptor) 2-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cyclohexanone:acceptor 2-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + cyclohexanone = AH(2) + cyclohex-2-enone.
0051786	name:Name:all-trans-retinol 13,14-reductase activity	name:Synonym:(13,14)-all-trans-retinol saturase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-13,14-dihydroretinol:acceptor 13,14-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-retinol:all-trans-13,14-dihydroretinol saturase activity	name:Synonym:retinol saturase activity	name:Synonym:RetSat activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-13,14-dihydroretinol + A = all-trans-retinol + AH(2). Note that this reaction has only been observed to occur in the opposite direction.
0051989	name:Name:coproporphyrinogen dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:coproporphyrinogen III oxidase activity	name:Synonym:coproporphyrinogen-III:S-adenosyl-L-methionine oxidoreductase (decarboxylating)	name:Synonym:HemN	name:Synonym:oxygen-independent coproporphyrinogen-III oxidase activity	name:Synonym:radical SAM enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: coproporphyrinogen III + 2 S-adenosyl-L-methionine = protoporphyrinogen IX + 2 CO2 + 2 L-methionine + 2 5'-deoxyadenosine.
0070818	name:Name:protoporphyrinogen oxidase activity	name:Synonym:protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase activity	name:Synonym:protoporphyrinogen-IX oxidase activity	name:Synonym:protoporphyrinogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: protoporphyrinogen-IX + acceptor = protoporphyrin-IX + reduced acceptor.
0080004	name:Name:thalian-diol desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a thalian-diol = a desaturated thalian-diol. This reaction is the introduction of a double bond to a thalian-diol molecule at carbon 15.
0016638	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0000286	name:Name:alanine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:AlaDH	name:Synonym:alanine oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-alanine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-alanine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-alanine:NAD+ oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:NAD-dependent alanine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NAD-linked alanine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADH-dependent alanine dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-alanine + H2O + NAD+ = pyruvate + NH3 + NADH + H+.
0008718	name:Name:D-amino-acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-amino-acid:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:D-amino-acid:acceptor oxidoreductase (deaminating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a D-amino acid + H2O + acceptor = a 2-oxo acid + NH3 + reduced acceptor.
0015930	name:Name:glutamate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of L-glutamine and 2-oxoglutarate from L-glutamate, using NADH, NADPH or ferredoxin as hydrogen acceptors.
0016639	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD+ or NADP.
0016640	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome molecule.
0016641	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an oxygen molecule.
0016642	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a disulfide group.
0016643	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0018526	name:Name:2-aminobenzoyl-CoA reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-aminobenzoyl-CoA + 2 H+ + 2 e- = NH3 + benzoyl-CoA.
0030058	name:Name:amine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:amine: (acceptor) oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:MADH activity	name:Synonym:methylamine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:primary-amine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:primary-amine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:primary-amine:acceptor oxidoreductase (deaminating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: R-CH2-NH2 + H2O + acceptor = R-CHO + NH3 + reduced acceptor.
0030059	name:Name:aralkylamine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:aralkylamine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:aralkylamine:acceptor oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:aromatic amine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:dehydrogenase, arylamine	name:Synonym:tyramine dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: R-CH2-NH2 + H2O + acceptor = R-CHO + NH3 + reduced acceptor.
0033735	name:Name:aspartate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-aspartate:NAD(P)+ oxidoreductase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:NAD-dependent aspartate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADH2-dependent aspartate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADP+-dependent aspartate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-aspartate + H2O + NAD(P)+ = oxaloacetate + NH3 + NAD(P)H + H+.
0034557	name:Name:2-hydroxylaminobenzoate reductase activity	name:Synonym:o-hydroxylaminobenzoate nitroreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxylaminobenzoate + NAD(P)H = anthranilate + NAD(P)+ + H2O.
0034932	name:Name:1-methoxypyrene 6,7-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-methoxypyrene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1-methoxypyrene-6,7-oxide + H2O.
0044318	name:Name:L-aspartate:fumarate oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-aspartate + fumarate = alpha-iminosuccinate + succinate.
0050323	name:Name:taurine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:taurine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:taurine:acceptor oxidoreductase (deaminating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + H(2)O + taurine = AH(2) + NH(4)(+) + sulfoacetaldehyde.
0050622	name:Name:glycine dehydrogenase (cyanide-forming) activity	name:Synonym:glycine:acceptor oxidoreductase (hydrogen-cyanide-forming)	name:Synonym:HCN synthase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen cyanide synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: glycine + 2 A = HCN + CO2 + 2 AH2.
0052585	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH2 group of donors, with a quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or similar compound.
0016645	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0004657	name:Name:proline dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-proline dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-proline:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:L-proline:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-proline + acceptor = (S)-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate + reduced acceptor.
0008480	name:Name:sarcosine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:monomethylglycine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:sarcosine N-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:sarcosine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:sarcosine:acceptor oxidoreductase (demethylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + H(2)O + sarcosine = AH(2) + formaldehyde + glycine.
0016646	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016647	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016648	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces disulfide.
0016649	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces quinone or similar compound.
0018528	name:Name:iminodiacetate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: iminodiacetate + OH- = H+ + 2 e- + glyoxylate + glycine.
0018532	name:Name:F420-independent 5,10-methenyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:F420-independent methylene-H4MPT dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N5,N10-methenyltetrahydromethanopterin + H2 = N5,N10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin.
0018534	name:Name:nitrilotriacetate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nitrilotriacetate + OH- = H+ + 2 e- + glyoxylate + iminodiacetate.
0018535	name:Name:nicotine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:D-nicotine oxidase activity	name:Synonym:nicotine oxidase activity	name:Synonym:nicotine:(acceptor) 6-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:nicotine:acceptor 6-oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nicotine + acceptor + H2O = (S)-6-hydroxynicotine + reduced acceptor.
0018537	name:Name:coenzyme F420-dependent N5,N10-methenyltetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin cyclohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:5-methyltetrahydromethanopterin:coenzyme-F420 oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme F420-dependent N(5),N(10)-methenyltetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:methylene-H(4)MPT reductase activity	name:Synonym:methylene-H4MPT reductase activity	name:Synonym:methylenetetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:N(5),N(10)-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:N(5),N(10)-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin:coenzyme-F420 oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:N5,N10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin reductase activity	name:Synonym:N5,N10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin:coenzyme-F420 oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-methyltetrahydromethanopterin + coenzyme F420 + H(+) = 5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin + reduced coenzyme F(420).
0019139	name:Name:cytokinin dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:6-N-dimethylallyladenine:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:cytokinin oxidase activity	name:Synonym:N6-dimethylallyladenine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:N6-dimethylallyladenine:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N6-dimethylallyladenine + acceptor + H2O = adenine + 3-methylbut-2-enal + reduced electron acceptor.
0030268	name:Name:methylenetetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin:coenzyme-F420 oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:N(5),N(10)-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5,10-methylenetetrahydromethanopterin + coenzyme F420 + 2 H(+) = 5,10-methenyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydromethanopterin + reduced coenzyme F(420).
0033694	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0034568	name:Name:isoproturon dimethylaminedehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: isoproturon + H2O = formaldehyde + monodemethylisoproturon + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034570	name:Name:hydroxymonomethylisoproturon dimethylaminedehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydroxymonodemethylisoproturon + H2O = formaldehyde + 4'-(2-hydroxyisopropyl)phenylurea + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034572	name:Name:monodemethylisoproturon dimethylaminedehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: monodemethylisoproturon + H2O = didemethylisoproturon + formaldehyde + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034780	name:Name:glyphosate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: glyphosate + OH- = glyoxylate + aminomethylphosphonic acid + H+ + 2 e-.
0034909	name:Name:6-hydroxypseudooxynicotine dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 6-hydroxypseudooxynicotine + H2O + OH- = 6-hydroxy-3-succinoylpyridine + 4 H+ + 4 e- + methylamine.
0046997	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CH-NH group of donors, flavin as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH-NH group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a flavin.
0047865	name:Name:dimethylglycine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:N,N-dimethylglycine oxidase activity	name:Synonym:N,N-dimethylglycine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:N,N-dimethylglycine:acceptor oxidoreductase (demethylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N,N-dimethylglycine + A + H(2)O = AH(2) + formaldehyde + sarcosine.
0050030	name:Name:L-pipecolate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-pipecolate:(acceptor) 1,6-oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:L-pipecolate:acceptor 1,6-oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-pipecolate + acceptor = delta1-piperideine-6-carboxylate + reduced acceptor. Delta1-piperideine-6-carboxylate is also known as 2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate.
0050099	name:Name:methylglutamate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:N-methyl-L-glutamate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:N-methyl-L-glutamate:acceptor oxidoreductase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:N-methylglutamate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-methyl-L-glutamate + A + H(2)O = L-glutamate + AH(2) + formaldehyde.
0050289	name:Name:spermidine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:spermidine:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:spermidine:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: spermidine + acceptor + H2O = 1,3-diaminopropane + 4-aminobutanal + reduced acceptor.
0016651	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H dehydrogenase	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, other acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0003954	name:Name:NADH dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:beta-NADH dehydrogenase dinucleotide activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome c reductase activity	name:Synonym:diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:dihydrocodehydrogenase I dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:diphosphopyridine diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:diphosphopyrinase activity	name:Synonym:DPNH diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:NADH diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:NADH hydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADH oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADH-menadione oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADH2 dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADH:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADH:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADH:cytochrome c oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:reduced diphosphopyridine nucleotide diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:type 1 dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:type I dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: NADH + H+ + acceptor = NAD+ + reduced acceptor.
0003959	name:Name:NADPH dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH2 diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH2-dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:old yellow enzyme	name:Synonym:OYE	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:TPNH dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:TPNH-diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:triphosphopyridine diaphorase activity	name:Synonym:triphosphopyridine nucleotide diaphorase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: NADPH + H+ + quinone acceptor = NADP+ + hydroquinone.
0016652	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD+ or NADP.
0016653	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, heme protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, haem protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a heme protein.
0016655	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or a similar acceptor molecule.
0016657	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, nitrogenous group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a nitrogenous group.
0016668	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, disulphide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0018538	name:Name:epoxide carboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the generic reaction: epoxide + CO2 + NAD+ + electron donor = beta-keto acid + NADH + reduced electron donor; the electron donor may be NADPH or a dithiol. This reaction is the ring opening and carboxylation of an epoxide; an example of such a reaction is: epoxypropane + CO2 + NAD+ + NADPH = acetoacetate + NADH + NADP+.
0050664	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on NADH or NADPH, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which NADH or NADPH acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an oxygen molecule.
0016661	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0008940	name:Name:nitrate reductase activity	name:Synonym:nitrate reductase (acceptor)	name:Synonym:nitrite:(acceptor) oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:nitrite:acceptor oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:respiratory nitrate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nitrite + acceptor = nitrate + reduced acceptor.
0016662	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016663	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016664	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0016966	name:Name:nitric oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:CYP55	name:Synonym:cytochrome bc nitric oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:nitric-oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:nitrogen oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:nitrous-oxide:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (NO-forming)	name:Synonym:nitrous-oxide:acceptor oxidoreductase (NO-forming)	name:Synonym:P450 nitric oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:P450nor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nitrous oxide + acceptor + H2O = 2 nitric oxide + reduced acceptor.
0018548	name:Name:pentaerythritol trinitrate reductase activity	name:Synonym:xenobiotic reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pentaerythritol trinitrate + NADPH = NADP+ + nitrate + pentaerythritol dinitrate.
0034800	name:Name:TNP dihydride denitratase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: TNP dihydride Meisenheimer complex (aci form) = 2,4-DNP hydride Meisenheimer complex + NO2.
0034914	name:Name:TNP hydride denitratase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: TNP hydride Meisenheimer complex = 2,4-dinitrophenol + nitrite.
0046857	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, with NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0050304	name:Name:nitrous-oxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:N2O reductase activity	name:Synonym:nitrogen:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (N2O-forming)	name:Synonym:nitrogen:acceptor oxidoreductase (N2O-forming)	name:Synonym:nitrous oxide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: nitrogen + H2O + acceptor = nitrous oxide + reduced acceptor.
0050418	name:Name:hydroxylamine reductase activity	name:Synonym:ammonia:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:ammonia:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydroxylamine (acceptor) reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: NH3 + H2O + acceptor = hydroxylamine + reduced acceptor.
0052586	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on other nitrogenous compounds as donors, with a quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a nitrogenous group, excluding NH and NH2 groups, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or similar compound.
0052690	name:Name:trichloro-p-hydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase activity	name:Synonym:tetrachlorohydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:trichlorohydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:xenobiotic reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,3,6-trichlorohydroquinone + 2 glutathione = 2,6-dichlorohydroquinone + glutathione disulfide + HCl.
0016667	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulfur group of donors, other acceptors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0009389	name:Name:dimethyl sulfoxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:dimethyl sulphoxide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dimethyl sulfoxide + H+ = dimethyl sulfide + H2O.
0009973	name:Name:adenylyl-sulfate reductase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine 5'-phosphosulfate reductase	name:Synonym:adenosine phosphosulfate reductase activity	name:Synonym:adenylyl-sulphate reductase activity	name:Synonym:AMP, sulfite:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate-forming)	name:Synonym:AMP, sulfite:acceptor oxidoreductase (adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate-forming)	name:Synonym:APS reductase activity	name:Synonym:APS-reductase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AMP + sulfite + acceptor = adenylyl sulfate + reduced acceptor.
0015036	name:Name:disulfide oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:disulphide oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction that interconverts reduced sulfide groups and oxidized disulfide bonds in a substrate.
0016002	name:Name:sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:assimilatory sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:assimilatory-type sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen-sulfide:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen-sulfide:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:siroheme sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:sulphite reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydrogen sulfide + acceptor + 3 H2O = sulfite + reduced acceptor.
0016669	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016670	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016671	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces disulfide.
0016672	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces quinone or a related compound.
0016673	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a sulfur group of donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on sulphur group of donors, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a sulfur-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0018550	name:Name:tetrachloro-p-hydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:tetrachlorohydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,3,5,6-tetrachlorohydroquinone + 2 glutathione = 2,3,6-trichlorohydroquinone + glutathione disulfide + HCl.
0018551	name:Name:hydrogensulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:bisulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:desulfofuscidin activity	name:Synonym:desulforubidin activity	name:Synonym:desulfoviridin activity	name:Synonym:dissimilatory sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:dissimilatory-type sulfite reductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogensulphite reductase activity	name:Synonym:trithionate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:trithionate:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trithionate + acceptor + 2 H2O + OH- = 3 HSO3- + reduced acceptor.
0032542	name:Name:sulfiredoxin activity	name:Synonym:peroxiredoxin-(S-hydroxy-S-oxocysteine) reductase activity	name:Synonym:peroxiredoxin-(S-hydroxy-S-oxocysteine):thiol oxidoreductase [ATP-hydrolysing; peroxiredoxin-(S-hydroxycysteine)-forming]	name:Synonym:Srx1	name:Synonym:sulphiredoxin activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: peroxiredoxin-(S-hydroxy-S-oxocysteine) + ATP + 2 R-SH = peroxiredoxin-(S-hydroxycysteine) + ADP + phosphate + R-S-S-R.
0051912	name:Name:CoB--CoM heterodisulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:CoB-CoM heterodisulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme B--coenzyme M heterodisulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme B:coenzyme M:methanophenazine oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme-M-7-mercaptoheptanoylthreonine-phosphate-heterodisulfide hydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:heterodisulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:soluble heterodisulfide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: coenzyme B + coenzyme M + methanophenazine = N-{7-[(2-sulfoethyl)dithio]heptanoyl}-3-O-phospho-L-threonine + dihydromethanophenazine.
0070226	name:Name:sulfur:ferric ion oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen sulfide:ferric ion oxidoreductase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a perthiol + 4 Fe3+ + 3 H2O = sulfite + a thiol + 4 Fe2+ + 8 H+.
0016675	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a heme group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on haem group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on heme group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a heme group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0016676	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a heme group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on haem group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a heme group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016677	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on a heme group of donors, nitrogenous group as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on haem group of donors, nitrogenous group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a heme group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a nitrogenous group.
0047726	name:Name:iron-cytochrome-c reductase activity	name:Synonym:ferrocytochrome-c:Fe3+ oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:iron-cytochrome c reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ferrocytochrome c + Fe3+ = ferricytochrome c + Fe2+.
0016679	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on diphenols and related substances as donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on diphenols and related substances as donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a diphenol or related substance acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0009496	name:Name:plastoquinol-plastocyanin reductase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome b6f	name:Synonym:plastoquinol/plastocyanin oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:plastoquinol:oxidized-plastocyanin oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: plastoquinol-1 + 2 oxidized plastocyanin = plastoquinone + 2 reduced plastocyanin.
0016680	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on diphenols and related substances as donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a diphenol, or related compound, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016681	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on diphenols and related substances as donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a diphenol, or related compound, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016682	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on diphenols and related substances as donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a diphenol, or related compound, acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016684	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on peroxide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the peroxide group acts as a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0004601	name:Name:peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:bacterial catalase-peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:donor:hydrogen-peroxide oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:eosinophil peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:extensin peroxidase	name:Synonym:guaiacol peroxidase	name:Synonym:heme peroxidase	name:Synonym:horseradish peroxidase (HRP)	name:Synonym:japanese radish peroxidase	name:Synonym:lactoperoxidase activity	name:Synonym:MPO	name:Synonym:myeloperoxidase activity	name:Synonym:oxyperoxidase activity	name:Synonym:peroxidase reaction	name:Synonym:protoheme peroxidase	name:Synonym:pyrocatechol peroxidase	name:Synonym:scopoletin peroxidase	name:Synonym:secretory plant peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:thiocyanate peroxidase	name:Synonym:verdoperoxidase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: donor + hydrogen peroxide = oxidized donor + 2 H2O.
0016695	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen acts as an electron donor.
0016696	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen acts as an electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016697	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen acts as an electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016699	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen acts as an electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0033748	name:Name:hydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:H2 producing hydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen-lyase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydrogenlyase activity	name:Synonym:uptake hydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2 + A = AH2.
0034558	name:Name:technetium (VII) reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pertechnetate ion + 3/2 H2 = technetium (IV) oxide + H2O + OH-.
0046994	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, with a quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen acts as an electron donor and reduces quinone or similar compound.
0046995	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on hydrogen as donor, with other known acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen reduces a known acceptor other than a cytochrome, an iron-sulfur protein, NAD, NADP, or a quinone or similar compound.
0016701	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on single donors with incorporation of molecular oxygen	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on single donors with incorporation of molecular oxygen, miscellaneous	name:Synonym:oxygenase	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from one donor, and molecular oxygen is incorporated into a donor.
0016702	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on single donors with incorporation of molecular oxygen, incorporation of two atoms of oxygen	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from one donor, and two oxygen atoms is incorporated into a donor.
0018553	name:Name:3-(2,3-dihydroxyphenyl)propionate 1,2-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-(2,3-dihydroxyphenyl)propionate + O2 = 2-hydroxy-6-keto-nona-2,4-dienedioate.
0018554	name:Name:1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene + O2 = 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate. C6 of the substrate molecular may have an NH2 group attached.
0018584	name:Name:2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid + 1/2 O2 = glyoxylate + 2,4,5-trichlorophenol.
0034527	name:Name:1,2-dihydroxy-8-carboxynaphthalene dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2-dihydroxy-8-carboxynaphthalene + O2 = 2-carboxy-2-hydroxy-8-carboxychromene.
0034533	name:Name:1,2-dihydroxy-7-hydroxymethylnaphthalene dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2-dihydroxy-7-hydroxymethylnaphthalene + O2 = 2-hydroxy-7-hydroxymethylchromene-2-carboxylate.
0034535	name:Name:1,2-dihydroxy-8-methylnaphthalene dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2-dihydroxy-8-methylnaphthalene + O2 = 2-hydroxy-8-methylchromene-2-carboxylate + H+.
0034788	name:Name:2,3-dihydroxy-2'-carboxybiphenyl 1,2-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,3-dihydroxy-2'-carboxybiphenyl + O2 = 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-6-(2-carboxyphenyl)-hexa-2,4-dienoate + H+.
0050113	name:Name:inositol oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:meso-inositol oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:MOO activity	name:Synonym:myo-inositol oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:myo-inositol:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: myo-inositol + O(2) = D-glucuronate + H(2)O + H(+).
0050360	name:Name:tryptophan 2'-dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:indole-3-alkane alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:indolyl-3-alkan alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:L-tryptophan:oxygen 2'-oxidoreductase (side-chain-cleaving)	name:Synonym:tryptophan side chain oxidase activity	name:Synonym:tryptophan side chain oxidase II	name:Synonym:tryptophan side chain oxidase type I	name:Synonym:tryptophan side-chain alpha,beta-oxidase activity	name:Synonym:tryptophan side-chain oxidase activity	name:Synonym:TSO activity	name:Synonym:TSO I	name:Synonym:TSO II	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-tryptophan + O2 = 3-indoleglycolaldehyde + CO2 + NH3.
0016705	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, miscellaneous	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from each of two donors, and molecular oxygen is reduced or incorporated into a donor.
0001567	name:Name:cholesterol 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cholesterol 25-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:cholesterol,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (25-hydroxylating) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + cholesterol + O(2) = 25-hydroxycholesterol + A + H(2)O.
0004392	name:Name:heme oxygenase (decyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:haem oxidase activity	name:Synonym:haem oxygenase (decyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:haem oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:heme oxidase activity	name:Synonym:heme oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:heme,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (alpha-methene-oxidizing, hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:ORP33 proteins	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: heme + 3 donor-H2 + 3 O2 = biliverdin + Fe2+ + CO + 3 acceptor + 3 H2O.
0004501	name:Name:ecdysone 20-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-ecdysone C-20 hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:ecdysone 20-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:ecdysone modification	name:Synonym:ecdysone,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (20-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + Ecdysone + O(2) = 20-hydroxyecdysone + A + H(2)O.
0004508	name:Name:steroid 17-alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:17alpha-hydroxylase-C17,20 lyase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P-450 (P-45017alpha,lyase)	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP17	name:Synonym:cytochrome p450 XVIIA1 activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P45017alpha	name:Synonym:steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase-C17-20 lyase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 17alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 17alpha-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:steroid 17alphahydroxylase/17,20 lyase activity	name:Synonym:steroid,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (17alpha-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a steroid + AH2 + O2 = a 17a-hydroxysteroid + A + H2O.
0004509	name:Name:steroid 21-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:21-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP21A1	name:Synonym:cytochrome p450 XXIA1 activity	name:Synonym:steroid 21-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:steroid,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (21-hydroxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a steroid + donor-H2 + O2 = a 21-hydroxysteroid + acceptor + H2O.
0004666	name:Name:prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase activity	name:Synonym:(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)-icosa-5,8,11,14-tetraenoate,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:(PG)H synthase activity	name:Synonym:fatty acid cyclooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:PG synthetase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin endoperoxide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin G/H synthase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin synthase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: arachidonate + donor-H2 + 2 O2 = prostaglandin H2 + acceptor + H2O.
0008387	name:Name:steroid 7-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2A12	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a steroid + donor-H2 + O2 = 7-alpha-hydroxysteroid + H2O.
0008388	name:Name:testosterone 15-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2A4	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: testosterone + donor-H2 + O2 = 15-alpha-hydroxytestosterone + H2O.
0008390	name:Name:testosterone 16-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2B10	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2B9	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2D10	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2D11	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP2D9	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: testosterone + donor-H2 + O2 = 6-alpha-hydroxytestosterone + H2O.
0008396	name:Name:oxysterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP7B1	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: an oxysterol + NADPH + O2 = 7-alpha-hydroxylated oxysterol + NADP+ + H2O.
0008397	name:Name:sterol 12-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP8B1	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a steroid + donor-H2 + O2 = 12-alpha-hydroxysteroid + H2O.
0008681	name:Name:2-octaprenyl-6-methoxyphenol hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxyphenol + O2 + 4 H+ = 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinol + H2O.
0016706	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, 2-oxoglutarate as one donor, and incorporation of one atom each of oxygen into both donors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from 2-oxoglutarate and one other donor, and one atom of oxygen is incorporated into each donor.
0016708	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, NADH or NADPH as one donor, and incorporation of two atoms of oxygen into one donor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from NADH or NADPH and one other donor, and two atoms of oxygen is incorporated into one donor.
0016717	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with oxidation of a pair of donors resulting in the reduction of molecular oxygen to two molecules of water	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from each of two donors, and molecular oxygen is reduced to two molecules of water.
0016719	name:Name:carotene 7,8-desaturase activity	name:Synonym:carotene,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:zeta-carotene desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: neurosporene + donor-H2 + O2 = lycopene + acceptor + 2 H2O.
0016720	name:Name:delta12-fatty acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:crepenynate synthase activity	name:Synonym:D12-fatty acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:delta-12 fatty acid acetylenase activity	name:Synonym:delta12 fatty acid acetylenase activity	name:Synonym:linoleate delta-12-fatty acid acetylenase (desaturase) activity	name:Synonym:linoleate delta12-fatty acid acetylenase (desaturase)	name:Synonym:linoleate, hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (Delta12-unsaturating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + linoleate + O(2) = A + crepenynate + 2 H(2)O.
0018585	name:Name:fluorene oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: fluorene + 2 H+ + 2 e- + O2 = H2O + 9-fluorenol.
0018586	name:Name:mono-butyltin dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:MBT dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: butyltin + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + beta-hydroxybutyltin.
0018588	name:Name:tri-n-butyltin dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:TBT dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tri-n-butyltin + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + beta-hydroxybutyldibutyltin.
0018589	name:Name:di-n-butyltin dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:DBT dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dibutyltin + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + beta-hydroxybutylbutyltin.
0018590	name:Name:methylsilanetriol hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methylsilanetriol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + hydroxymethylsilanetriol.
0018596	name:Name:dimethylsilanediol hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:DMSD hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dimethylsilanediol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + hydroxymethylmethylsilanediol.
0018598	name:Name:hydroxymethylsilanetriol oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydroxymethylsilanetriol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 2 H2O + formylsilanetriol.
0018600	name:Name:alpha-pinene dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-pinene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = H2O + myrtenol.
0018688	name:Name:DDT 2,3-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)ethane + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = cis-2,3-dihydrodiol DDT. 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)ethane is also known as DDT.
0018689	name:Name:naphthalene disulfonate 1,2-dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:naphthalene disulphonate 1,2-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (1/2)-unsubstituted naphthalenoid-(2/1)-sulfonate + 2 H+ + 2 e- + O2 = 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene derivative + HSO3(-). Substrates include naphthalene-1,6-disulfonate (forms 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene-6-sulfonate), naphthalene-1-sulfonate (forms 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene), naphthalene-2,6-disulfonate (forms 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene-6-sulfonate) and naphthalene-2-sulfonate (forms 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene).
0034559	name:Name:bisphenol A hydroxylase B activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: bisphenol A + NADH + H+ + O2 = 1,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-propanol + NAD+ + H2O.
0034562	name:Name:2,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1-propanol hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1-propanol + NADH + H+ + O2 = 2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1,2-propanediol + NAD+ + H2O.
0034786	name:Name:9-fluorenone-3,4-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 9-fluorenone + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1-hydro-1,1a-dihydroxy-9-fluorenone.
0034804	name:Name:benzo(a)pyrene 11,12-epoxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: benzo(a)pyrene + O2 = benzo(a)pyrene-11,12-epoxide.
0034816	name:Name:anthracene 9,10-dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: anthracene + 2 H2O = cis-9,10-dihydroanthracene-9,10-diol.
0034857	name:Name:2-(methylthio)benzothiazole monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-(methylthio)benzothiazole + 1/2 O2 = 2-(methylsulfinyl)benzothiazole.
0034858	name:Name:2-hydroxybenzothiazole monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxybenzothiazole + 1/2 O2 = 2,6-dihydroxybenzothiazole.
0034859	name:Name:benzothiazole monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: benzothiazole + 1/2 O2 = 2-hydroxybenzothiazole.
0034862	name:Name:2,6-dihydroxybenzothiazole monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,6-dihydroxybenzothiazole + 1/2 O2 = 2,6,7-trihydroxybenzothiazole.
0034870	name:Name:pinacolone 5-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,2-dimethyl-3-pentanone + 1/2 O2 = 1-hydroxy-4,4-dimethylpentan-3-one.
0034873	name:Name:thioacetamide S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: thioacetamide + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = thioacetamide S-oxide + H2O.
0034874	name:Name:thioacetamide S-oxide S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: thioacetamide S-oxide + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = thioacetamide S,S-dioxide + H2O.
0034888	name:Name:endosulfan monooxygenase I activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: endosulfan + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = endosulfan sulfate + H2O.
0034893	name:Name:N-nitrodimethylamine hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-nitrodimethylamine + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = N-nitromethylamine + formaldehyde + H2O.
0034897	name:Name:4-(1-ethyl-1,4-dimethyl-pentyl)phenol monoxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-(1-ethyl-1,4-dimethyl-pentyl)phenol + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = hydroquinone + 3,6-dimethylheptan-3-ol.
0034903	name:Name:endosulfan ether monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: endosulfan ether + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = endosulfan hydroxyether + H2O.
0034925	name:Name:pyrene 4,5-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pyrene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = pyrene-4,5-oxide + H2O.
0034927	name:Name:pyrene 1,2-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pyrene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = pyrene-1,2-oxide + H2O.
0034928	name:Name:1-hydroxypyrene 6,7-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-hydroxypyrene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1-hydroxypyrene-6,7-oxide + H2O.
0034929	name:Name:1-hydroxypyrene 7,8-monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-hydroxypyrene + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1-hydroxypyrene-7,8-oxide + H2O.
0034950	name:Name:phenylboronic acid monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: phenylboronic acid + O2 + 2 H+ + 2 e- = phenol + B(OH)3.
0042284	name:Name:sphingolipid delta-4 desaturase activity	name:Synonym:delta-4 sphingolipid desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the introduction of a trans double bond between C4 and C5 of the long chain base region of a sphingolipid. Sphingolipids are composed of a long chain base (LCB) amide-linked to a very long chain fatty acid.
0042389	name:Name:omega-3 fatty acid desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the introduction of an omega-3 double bond into the fatty acid hydrocarbon chain.
0043823	name:Name:spheroidene monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: spheroidene + O2 = spheroidenone + H2O.
0045485	name:Name:omega-6 fatty acid desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the introduction of an omega-6 double bond into the fatty acid hydrocarbon chain.
0046996	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, with NADH or NADPH as one donor, and the other dehydrogenated	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from NADH or NADPH and one other donor, and the latter donor is dehydrogenated.
0047066	name:Name:phospholipid-hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione:lipid-hydroperoxide oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase activity	name:Synonym:peroxidation-inhibiting protein activity	name:Synonym:peroxidation-inhibiting protein: peroxidase, glutathione (phospholipid hydroperoxide-reducing)	name:Synonym:PHGPX	name:Synonym:phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a lipid hydroperoxide + 2 reduced glutathione = 2 H2O + lipid + 2 oxidized glutathione.
0047098	name:Name:Latia-luciferin monooxygenase (demethylating) activity	name:Synonym:Latia luciferin monooxygenase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:Latia-luciferin,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (demethylating)	name:Synonym:luciferase (Latia luciferin)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 O2 + donor-H2 + Latia luciferin = light + H2O + acceptor + formate + CO2 + oxidized Latia luciferin.
0050012	name:Name:juglone 3-monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:5-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (3-hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:juglone hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:naphthoquinone hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:naphthoquinone-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone + AH(2) + O(2) = 3,5-dihydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone + A + H(2)O + H(+).
0050016	name:Name:kynurenine 7,8-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:kynurenate 7,8-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:kynurenate,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:kynurenic acid hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:kynurenic hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: kynurenate + donor-H2 + O2 = 7,8-dihydro-7,8-dihydroxykynurenate + acceptor.
0050207	name:Name:plasmanylethanolamine desaturase activity	name:Synonym:1-O-alkyl 2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylethanolamine desaturase activity	name:Synonym:1-O-alkyl-2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylethanolamine desaturase activity	name:Synonym:alkylacylglycero-phosphorylethanolamine dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:alkylacylglycerophosphoethanolamine desaturase activity	name:Synonym:dehydrogenase, alkyl-acylglycerophosphorylethanolamine	name:Synonym:O-1-alkyl-2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:plasmenylethanolamine desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-1-alkyl-2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine + donor-H2 + O2 = O-1-alk-1-enyl-2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine + acceptor + 2 H2O.
0050498	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, with 2-oxoglutarate as one donor, and the other dehydrogenated	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which hydrogen or electrons are transferred from 2-oxoglutarate and one other donor, and the latter donor is dehydrogenated.
0050600	name:Name:myristoyl-CoA 11-(E) desaturase activity	name:Synonym:n-tetradecanoyl-CoA,NAD(P)H:O2 oxidoreductase [11-(E) desaturating]	name:Synonym:n-tetradecanoyl-CoA,NADPH:O2 oxidoreductase [11-(E) desaturating]	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: myristoyl-CoA + NAD(P)H + H+ + O2 = (E)-11-tetradecenoyl-CoA + NAD(P)+ + 2 H2O.
0050601	name:Name:myristoyl-CoA 11-(Z) desaturase activity	name:Synonym:n-tetradecanoyl-CoA,NAD(P)H:O2 oxidoreductase [11-(Z) desaturating]	name:Synonym:n-tetradecanoyl-CoA,NADPH:O2 oxidoreductase [11-(Z) desaturating]	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: myristoyl-CoA + NAD(P)H + H+ + O2 = (Z)-11-tetradecenoyl-CoA + NAD(P)+ + 2 H2O.
0050602	name:Name:monoprenyl isoflavone epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:7-O-methylluteone,NADPH:O2 oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:7-O-methylluteone:O2 oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:monoprenyl isoflavone monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O2 + NADPH + H+ + 7-O-methylluteone = H2O + NADP+ + dihydrofurano derivatives.
0050604	name:Name:taxadiene 5-alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:taxa-4,11-diene,hydrogen-donor:oxygen oxidoreductase (5alpha-hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:taxadiene 5alpha-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + O(2) + taxa-4,11-diene = A + H(2)O + taxa-4(20),11-dien-5alpha-ol.
0051920	name:Name:peroxiredoxin activity	name:Synonym:AhpC activity	name:Synonym:alkyl hydroperoxide reductase C22 activity	name:Synonym:PRDX activity	name:Synonym:Prx activity	name:Synonym:thiol-containing-reductant:hydroperoxide oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 R'-SH + ROOH = R'-S-S-R' + H2O + ROH.
0052631	name:Name:sphingolipid delta-8 desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of a double bond between C8 and C9 of the long chain base of a sphingolipid. For example, sphinganine (d18:0) = 8-sphingenine (d18:1delta8); phytosphinganine (t18:0) = 8-phytosphingenine (t18:1delta8); and 4-sphingenine (18:1delta4) = 4,8-sphingadienine (d18:2delta4,8).
0052637	name:Name:delta 3-trans-hexadecenoic acid phosphatidylglycerol desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-18:3-3-16:0-phosphatidylglycerol = 1-18:3-3-trans-16:1-phosphatidylglycerol + 2 H+. This reaction is the formation of a trans double bond between carbon 3 and carbon 4 (counting from the carboxyl end) of palmitic acid, which is specifically esterified to the sn-2 glyceryl carbon of phosphatidylglycerol.
0070704	name:Name:sterol desaturase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the introduction of a double bond into a sterol molecule.
0080102	name:Name:3-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 3-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 3-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0080103	name:Name:4-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 4-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 4-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0080104	name:Name:5-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 5-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 5-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0080105	name:Name:6-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 6-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 6-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0080106	name:Name:7-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 7-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 7-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0080107	name:Name:8-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate S-oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of 8-methylthiopropyl glucosinolate to 8-methylsulfinylpropyl glucosinolate.
0016721	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on superoxide radicals as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a superoxide radical (O2- or O2.-) acts as a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0004784	name:Name:superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:copper, zinc superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:Cu,Zn-SOD	name:Synonym:Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:cuprein	name:Synonym:cytocuprein	name:Synonym:erythrocuprein	name:Synonym:Fe-SOD	name:Synonym:ferrisuperoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:hemocuprein	name:Synonym:hepatocuprein	name:Synonym:iron superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:iron superoxide oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:manganese superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:manganese superoxide oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:Mn, Fe superoxide dismutase	name:Synonym:Mn-SOD	name:Synonym:nickel superoxide dismutase activity	name:Synonym:nickel superoxide oxidoreductase	name:Synonym:SOD	name:Synonym:SOD-1	name:Synonym:SOD-2	name:Synonym:SOD-3	name:Synonym:SOD-4	name:Synonym:SODF	name:Synonym:SODS	name:Synonym:superoxide dismutase I	name:Synonym:superoxide dismutase II	name:Synonym:superoxide:superoxide oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:zinc superoxide oxidoreductase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 superoxide + 2 H+ = O2 + hydrogen peroxide.
0034877	name:Name:isonicotinate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: isonicotinate + acceptor + H2O = 2-hydroxyisonicotinate + reduced acceptor.
0034878	name:Name:2-hydroxyisonicotinate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxyisonicotinate + acceptor + H2O = citrazinate + reduced acceptor.
0034880	name:Name:citrazinate dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: citrazinate + H2O = 2,3,6-trihydroxyisonicotinate + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0050605	name:Name:superoxide reductase activity	name:Synonym:desulfoferrodoxin activity	name:Synonym:neelaredoxin activity	name:Synonym:rubredoxin:superoxide oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: superoxide + reduced rubredoxin + 2 H+ = H2O2 + rubredoxin.
0016722	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, oxidizing metal ions	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which the oxidation state of metal ion is altered.
0016723	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, oxidizing metal ions, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which the oxidation state of metal ion is altered and NAD+ or NADP+ acts as an electron acceptor.
0016724	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, oxidizing metal ions, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which the oxidation state of metal ion is altered and oxygen acts as an electron acceptor.
0043783	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, oxidizing metal ions with flavin as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which the oxidation state of metal ion is altered and flavin acts as an electron acceptor.
0016725	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0016726	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD+ or NADP.
0016727	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an oxygen molecule.
0016728	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a disulfide group.
0018693	name:Name:ethylbenzene hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:ethylbenzene dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:ethylbenzene:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + ethylbenzene + H(2)O = (S)-1-phenylethanol + AH(2).
0018694	name:Name:p-cymene methyl hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: p-cymene + NADH + O2 = NAD+ + OH- + p-cumic alcohol.
0018695	name:Name:4-cresol dehydrogenase (hydroxylating) activity	name:Synonym:4-cresol dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:4-cresol:acceptor oxidoreductase (methyl-hydroxylating)	name:Synonym:p-cresol methylhydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:p-cresol-(acceptor) oxidoreductase (hydroxylating) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-cresol + acceptor + H2O = 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde + reduced acceptor.
0033695	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, quinone or similar compound as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a quinone or similar acceptor molecule.
0033791	name:Name:3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestanoyl-CoA 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:(25R)-3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestan-26-oyl-CoA:acceptor 24-oxidoreductase (24R-hydroxylating) activity	name:Synonym:3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestan-26-oate 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestanoyl-CoA oxidase activity	name:Synonym:THC-CoA oxidase activity	name:Synonym:THCA-CoA oxidase activity	name:Synonym:trihydroxycoprostanoyl-CoA oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (25R)-3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestan-26-oyl-CoA + H2O + acceptor = (24R,25R)-3alpha,7alpha,12alpha,24-tetrahydroxy-5beta-cholestan-26-oyl-CoA + reduced acceptor.
0033792	name:Name:bile-acid 7alpha-dehydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:7alpha-dehydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:bile acid 7-dehydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cholate 7alpha-dehydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycholate:FAD oxidoreductase (7alpha-dehydroxylating) activity	name:Synonym:deoxycholate:NAD+ oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: deoxycholate + FAD + H2O = cholate + FADH2, and lithocholate + FAD + H2O = chenodeoxycholate + FADH2.
0034569	name:Name:monodemethylisoproturon dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: monodemethylisoproturon + H2O = hydroxymonodemethylisoproturon + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034574	name:Name:didemethylisoproturon dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: didemethylisoproturon + H2O = 4'-(2-hydroxyisopropyl)phenylurea + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0034575	name:Name:4-isopropylaniline dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-isopropylaniline + H2O = 4'-(2-hydroxyisopropyl)phenylaniline + 2 H+ + 2 e-.
0052592	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, with an iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on CH or CH2 groups, with an iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a CH2 group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0052620	name:Name:thymine dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2O + thymine + acceptor = 5-methyl-barbiturate + donor-H2.
0016730	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on iron-sulfur proteins as donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on iron-sulphur proteins as donors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an iron-sulfur protein acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0016731	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on iron-sulfur proteins as donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an iron-sulfur protein acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016732	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on iron-sulfur proteins as donors, dinitrogen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an iron-sulfur protein acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces dinitrogen.
0030385	name:Name:ferredoxin:thioredoxin reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the two-electron reduction of the disulfide of thioredoxins with electrons from ferredoxin involving a 4Fe-4S cluster and an adjacent active-site disulfide.
0032441	name:Name:pheophorbide a oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pheophorbide a + reduced ferredoxin + 2 O2 = red chlorophyll catabolite + oxidized ferredoxin + H2O.
0016737	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on reduced flavodoxin as donor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which reduced flavodoxin acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0016738	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on reduced flavodoxin as donor, dinitrogen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which reduced flavodoxin acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces dinitrogen.
0016903	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0004738	name:Name:pyruvate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvic acid dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvic dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate.
0016620	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0016622	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, cytochrome as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a cytochrome.
0016623	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces oxygen.
0016624	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a disulfide.
0016625	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, iron-sulfur protein as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors, iron-sulphur protein as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which an aldehyde or ketone (oxo) group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces an iron-sulfur protein.
0018469	name:Name:myrtenal dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: myrtenal + H2O = 2 H+ + 2 e- + myrtenic acid.
0018470	name:Name:4-hydroxybutaraldehyde dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-hydroxybutyraldehyde + H2O = 2 H+ + 2 e- + 4-hydroxybutanoate.
0018492	name:Name:carbon-monoxide dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:carbon monoxide dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:carbon-monoxide:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: CO + H2O + acceptor = CO2 + reduced acceptor.
0018493	name:Name:formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:formylmethanofuran:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:formylmethanofuran:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-formylmethanofuran + A + H(2)O + H(+) = AH(2) + CO(2) + methanofuran.
0033727	name:Name:aldehyde dehydrogenase (FAD-independent) activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde:acceptor oxidoreductase (FAD-independent) activity	name:Synonym:AORDd	name:Synonym:Mop	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: an aldehyde + H2O + acceptor = a carboxylate + reduced acceptor.
0034852	name:Name:4,4-dimethyl-3-oxopentanal dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4,4-dimethyl-3-oxopentanal + H2O = 4,4-dimethyl-3-oxopentanoate + 3 H+ + 2 e-.
0034864	name:Name:2,4,4-trimethylpentanal dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,4-trimethylpentanal + H2O = 2,4,4-trimethylpentanoate + 3 H+ + 2 e-.
0043794	name:Name:formate dehydrogenase (F420) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: formate + coenzyme F420 = CO2 + reduced coenzyme F420.
0043795	name:Name:glyceraldehyde oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glyceraldehyde + H2O + acceptor = D-glycerate + reduced acceptor.
0047113	name:Name:aldehyde dehydrogenase (pyrroloquinoline-quinone) activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde dehydrogenase (acceptor) activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde:(pyrroloquinoline-quinone) oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2O + acceptor + an aldehyde = donor-H2 + an acid.
0047770	name:Name:carboxylate reductase activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:carboxylic acid reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: an aldehyde + acceptor + H2O = a carboxylate + reduced acceptor.
0047895	name:Name:formaldehyde dismutase activity	name:Synonym:aldehyde dismutase activity	name:Synonym:cannizzanase activity	name:Synonym:formaldehyde:formaldehyde oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 formaldehyde + H2O = methanol + formate.
0051268	name:Name:alpha-keto amide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-keto amide + 2 H+ (from donor) = (R)-hydroxy amide. Alpha-keto amides are of the form R-CO-CONH2, where R may be aromatic or aliphatic.
0051269	name:Name:alpha-keto ester reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-keto ester + 2 H+ (from donor) = (R)-hydroxy ester. Alpha-keto esters are of the form R(1)-CO-CO-O-R(2), where the R groups may be aromatic or aliphatic.
0018698	name:Name:vinyl chloride reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: vinyl chloride + 2 H+ + 2 e- = HCl + ethene.
0018699	name:Name:1,1,1-trichloroethane reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1,1-trichloroethane + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 1,1-dichloroethane + HCl.
0018700	name:Name:2-chloro-N-isopropylacetanilide reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-chloro-N-isopropylacetanilide + H+ + 2 e- = Cl- + N-isopropylacetanilide.
0018701	name:Name:2,5-dichlorohydroquinone reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: organohalide + 2 H+ + 2 e- = R-H + HCl. Reactants include chlorohydroquinone (forms hydroquinone) and 2,5-dichlorohydroquinone (forms chlorohydroquinone).
0018702	name:Name:1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:DDE dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene + H+ + 2 e- = Cl- + 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene. 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene is also known as DDE; 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene is also known as DDMU.
0018703	name:Name:2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetate dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid + H+ + 2 e- = Cl- + 4-chlorophenoxyacetate.
0018705	name:Name:1,2-dichloroethene reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:1,2-dichloroethylene reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2-dichloroethene + 2 H+ + 2 e- = HCl + vinyl chloride.
0018706	name:Name:pyrogallol hydroxytransferase activity	name:Synonym:1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene hydroxyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene-pyrogallol hydroxyltransferase (transhydroxylase)	name:Synonym:1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene:1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene hydroxyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene:1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene hydroxytransferase activity	name:Synonym:1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene:pyrogallol transhydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:pyrogallol hydroxyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:transhydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene + 1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene = 1,3,5-trihydroxybenzene + 1,2,3,5-tetrahydroxybenzene.
0019168	name:Name:2-octaprenylphenol hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 2-octaprenylphenol + O2 = 2 2-octaprenyl-6-hydroxyphenol.
0019174	name:Name:tetrahydrothiophene 1-oxide reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tetrahydrothiophene 1-oxide + reduced acceptor = tetrahydrothiophene + acceptor.
0030611	name:Name:arsenate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the interconversion of arsenate and arsenite.
0008794	name:Name:arsenate reductase (glutaredoxin) activity	name:Synonym:glutharedoxin:arsenate oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: arsenate + reduced glutaredoxin = arsenite + oxidized glutaredoxin. Glutaredoxin functions as the electron donor for arsenate reduction. The electron flow therefore is ( NADPH -> glutathione reductase (EC:1.6.4.2) -> ) glutathione -> glutaredoxin -> arsenate reductase, i.e. glutathione is reduced by glutathione reductase and glutaredoxin is reduced by glutathione.
0030612	name:Name:arsenate reductase (thioredoxin) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: arsenate + thioredoxin = arsenite + thioredoxin disulfide. Thioredoxin disulfide is also known as oxidized thioredoxin.
0030613	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors, with other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a phosphorus- or arsenic-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0030614	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors, disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors, with disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a phosphorus- or arsenic-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a disulfide.
0050499	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors, with NAD(P)+ as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which a phosphorus- or arsenic-containing group acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a NAD(P)+ to NAD(P)H.
0050522	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on phosphorus or arsenic in donors, with other known acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which phosphorus or arsenic acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a known acceptor other than disulfide, NAD or NADP.
0050612	name:Name:arsenate reductase (donor) activity	name:Synonym:arsenate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:arsenate:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: A + arsenite + H(2)O = AH(2) + arsenate + 2 H(+).
0033796	name:Name:sulfur reductase activity	name:Synonym:(donor):sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:sulphur reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of elemental sulfur or polysulfide to hydrogen sulfide.
0033797	name:Name:selenate reductase activity	name:Synonym:selenite:reduced acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 e(-) + 2 H(+) + selenate = H(2)O + selenite.
0033798	name:Name:thyroxine 5-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:acceptor:3,3',5'-triiodo-L-thyronine oxidoreductase (iodinating) activity	name:Synonym:diiodothyronine 5'-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:inner ring-deiodinating pathway	name:Synonym:iodothyronine 5-deiodinase activity	name:Synonym:iodothyronine inner ring monodeiodinase activity	name:Synonym:type III iodothyronine deiodinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,3',5'-triiodo-L-thyronine + iodide + A + H+ = L-thyroxine + AH2.
0034539	name:Name:3,3',5,5'-tetrabromobisphenol A reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,3',5,5'-tetrabromobisphenol A + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 3,3',5-tribromobisphenol A + HBr.
0034540	name:Name:3-monobromobisphenol A reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-monobromobisphenol A + 2 H+ + 2 e- = bisphenol A + HBr.
0034542	name:Name:trimethylarsine oxidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trimethylarsine oxide + 2 H+ + 2 e- = trimethylarsine + H2O.
0034546	name:Name:2,4-dichloroaniline reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4-dichloroaniline + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 4-chloroaniline + HCl.
0034550	name:Name:dimethylarsinate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dimethylarsinate + 3 H+ + 2 e- = dimethylarsinous acid + H2O.
0034554	name:Name:3,3',5-tribromobisphenol A reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,3',5-tribromobisphenol A + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 3,3'-dibromobisphenol A + HBr.
0034555	name:Name:3,3'-dibromobisphenol A reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,3'-dibromobisphenol A + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 3-monobromobisphenol A + HBr.
0034567	name:Name:chromate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: chromate = chromium (III).
0034937	name:Name:perchlorate reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: perchlorate + 2 H+ + 2 e- = chlorate + H2O.
0034949	name:Name:1,1-dichloroethane reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1-dichloroethane + 2 H+ + 2 e- = chloroethane + HCl.
0035515	name:Name:oxidative RNA demethylase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoglutarate-dependent RNA demethylase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from one or more nucleosides within a RNA molecule involving the oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms.
0035516	name:Name:oxidative DNA demethylase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoglutarate-dependent DNA demethylase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of the methyl group from one or more nucleotides within a DNA molecule involving the oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms.
0042380	name:Name:hydroxymethylbutenyl pyrophosphate reductase activity	name:Synonym:(E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate reductase (IPP and DMAPP forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of both isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate from (E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate.
0043365	name:Name:[formate-C-acetyltransferase]-activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:[pyruvate formate-lyase]-activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:formate acetyltransferase activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:formate acetyltransferase-glycine dihydroflavodoxin:S-adenosyl-L-methionine oxidoreductase (S-adenosyl-L-methionine cleaving) activity	name:Synonym:formate C-acetyltransferase-glycine dihydroflavodoxin:S-adenosyl-L-methionine oxidoreductase (S-adenosyl-L-methionine cleaving)	name:Synonym:formate-C-acetyltransferase-activating enzyme	name:Synonym:PFL activase activity	name:Synonym:PFL-glycine:S-adenosyl-L-methionine H transferase (flavodoxin-oxidizing, S-adenosyl-L-methionine-cleaving) activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate formate-lyase-activating enzyme	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine + dihydroflavodoxin + [formate C-acetyltransferase]-glycine = 5'-deoxyadenosine + L-methionine + flavodoxin semiquinone + [formate C-acetyltransferase]-glycin-2-yl radical.
0043738	name:Name:F420H2 dehydrogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methanophenazine + reduced cofactor F420 = dihydromethanophenazine + cofactor F420.
0043826	name:Name:sulfur oxygenase reductase activity	name:Synonym:SOR	name:Synonym:sulphur oxygenase reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5 S0 + oxygen + 4 H2O = sulfite + thiosulfate + 2 hydrogen sulfide.
0043871	name:Name:delta1-piperideine-6-carboxylate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:AmaB	name:Synonym:PIPOX	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: delta1-piperideine-6-carboxylate + NAD+ + 2 H2O = 2-aminoadipate + NADH + H+. Delta1-piperideine-6-carboxylate is also known as 2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate.
0043880	name:Name:crotonyl-CoA reductase activity	name:Synonym:CCR	name:Synonym:crotonyl-coenzyme A reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reduction of crotonyl-CoA to butyryl-CoA.
0043883	name:Name:malolactic enzyme activity	name:Synonym:MleS	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: malate + H+ = L-lactate + CO2.
0043914	name:Name:NADPH:sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:CoA-dependent NAD(P)H sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme A-dependent NAD(P)H sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H elemental sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H sulphur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NAD(P)H:sulfur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:sulphur oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NSR	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: NADPH + S0 = hydrogen sulfide + NADP.
0045301	name:Name:tRNA-(2-methylthio-N-6-(cis-hydroxy)isopentenyl adenosine)-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:2-methylthio-cis-ribozeatin hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-(2-methylthio-N-6-(cis-hydroxy)isopentenyladenosine)-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-(ms2io6A)-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tRNA-(2-methylthio-N-6-isopentenyl adenosine) = tRNA-(2-methylthio-N-6-(cis-hydroxy)isopentenyl adenosine) + O2. 2-methylthio-N-6-isopentenyl adenosine is also known as ms2i6A; 2-methylthio-N-6-(cis-hydroxy)isopentenyl adenosine is also known as ms2io6A and 2-methylthio-cis-ribozeatin.
0045550	name:Name:geranylgeranyl reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of phytyl group from the stepwise reduction of a geranylgeranyl group.
0046422	name:Name:violaxanthin de-epoxidase activity	name:Synonym:VDE	name:Synonym:violaxanthin:ascorbate oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: violaxanthin + 2 ascorbate = zeaxanthin + 2 dehydroascorbate + 2 H2O; and antheraxanthin + ascorbate = zeaxanthin + dehydroascorbate + H2O.
0046992	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on X-H and Y-H to form an X-Y bond	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on X-H and Y-H to form an X-Y bond, with other acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which X-H and Y-H form X-Y.
0046993	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on X-H and Y-H to form an X-Y bond, with oxygen as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which X-H and Y-H form X-Y and the acceptor is oxygen.
0050448	name:Name:beta-cyclopiazonate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:b-cyclopiazonate dehydrogenase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cyclopiazonate oxidocyclase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cyclopiazonate:(acceptor) oxidoreductase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:beta-cyclopiazonate:acceptor oxidoreductase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:beta-cyclopiazonic oxidocyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: beta-cyclopiazonate + A = alpha-cyclopiazonate + AH(2).
0050485	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on X-H and Y-H to form an X-Y bond, with a disulfide as acceptor	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase activity, acting on X-H and Y-H to form an X-Y bond, with a disulphide as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which X-H and Y-H form X-Y and the acceptor is disulfide.
0047143	name:Name:chlorate reductase activity	name:Synonym:chlorate reductase C	name:Synonym:chlorite:acceptor oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AH(2) + chlorate = A + chlorite + H(2)O + H(+).
0050629	name:Name:tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:acceptor:trichloroethene oxidoreductase (chlorinating)	name:Synonym:tetrachloroethene reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trichloroethene + chloride + acceptor = tetrachloroethene + reduced acceptor.
0050697	name:Name:1,1,2-trichloroethene reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:1,1,2-trichloroethylene reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:TCE-reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trichloroethene + 2 H+ + 2 e- = HCl + 1,2-dichloroethene.
0050781	name:Name:ortho-trichlorophenol reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:2,4,6-TCP reductive dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:2,4,6-trichlorophenol reductive dehalogenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4,6-trichlorophenol + 2 H+ + 2 e- = 2,4-dichlorophenol + HCl.
0051213	name:Name:dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which both atoms of oxygen from one molecule of O2 are incorporated into the (reduced) product(s) of the reaction. The two atoms of oxygen may be distributed between two different products.
0046566	name:Name:DOPA dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:dihydroxyphenylalanine dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the 4,5-ring opening reaction: 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine + O2 = 4,5-seco-DOPA. 4,5-seco-DOPA spontaneously recyclizes to form betalamic acid.
0050589	name:Name:leucocyanidin oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:anthocyanidin synthase activity	name:Synonym:leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase activity	name:Synonym:leucoanthocyanidin hydroxylase	name:Synonym:leucocyanidin,2-oxoglutarate:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: leucocyanidin + 2-oxoglutarate + O2 = cis- or trans-dihydroquercetin + succinate + CO2 + 2 H2O.
0070579	name:Name:methylcytosine dioxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methylcytosine + 2-oxoglutarate + O2 = 5-hydroxymethylcytosine + succinate + CO2.
0051744	name:Name:3,8-divinyl protochlorophyllide a 8-vinyl reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: divinyl protochlorophyllide a + NADPH + H+ = monovinyl protochlorophyllide a + NADP+.
0052583	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on halogen in donors	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which a halogen in the donor substance acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces a hydrogen or electron acceptor.
0052584	name:Name:oxidoreductase activity, acting on halogen in donors, with NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction in which a halogen in the donor substance acts as a hydrogen or electron donor and reduces NAD or NADP.
0052614	name:Name:uracil oxygenase activity	name:Synonym:pyrimidine oxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: uracil + NADH + O2 + H+ = ureidoacrylate peracid + NAD+. Ureidoacrylate peracid is spontaneously reduced by NADH to form ureidoacrylate.
0052693	name:Name:epoxyqueuosine reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: epoxyqueuosine in tRNA + reductant = queuosine in tRNA + oxidised reductant.
0070576	name:Name:vitamin D 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:calciferol 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cholecalciferol 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:ergocalciferol 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin D2 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin D3 24-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of C-24 of any form of vitamin D.
0030342	name:Name:1-alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:1,25-(OH)2D3 24-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:calcitriol 24-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of C-24 of 1-alpha,25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25-hydroxyvitamin D3; calcitriol).
0070643	name:Name:vitamin D 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:calciferol 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cholecalciferol 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:ergocalciferol 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin D2 25-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydroxylation of C-25 of any form of vitamin D.
0030343	name:Name:vitamin D3 25-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:cholecalciferol 25-hydroxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: vitamin D3 + NADPH + H+ + O2 = calcidiol + NADP+ + H2O.
0080132	name:Name:fatty acid alpha-hydroxylase activity	name:Synonym:fatty acid 2-hydroxylase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of a fatty acid to an alpha-hydroxylated fatty acid. A hydroxyl group is added to the second carbon, counted from the carboxyl end, of a fatty acid chain.
0016740	name:Name:transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a group, e.g. a methyl group, glycosyl group, acyl group, phosphorus-containing, or other groups, from one compound (generally regarded as the donor) to another compound (generally regarded as the acceptor). Transferase is the systematic name for any enzyme of EC class 2.
0000031	name:Name:mannosylphosphate transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a mannosylphosphate group from one compound to another.
0008414	name:Name:CDP-alcohol phosphotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a CDP-alcohol group from one compound to another.
0008665	name:Name:2'-phosphotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphate group from one compound to the 2' position of another.
0000215	name:Name:tRNA 2'-phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:2'-phospho-[ligated tRNA]:NAD+ phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:2'-phospho-tRNA:NAD+ phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:Tpt1	name:Synonym:Tpt1p	name:Synonym:yeast 2'-phosphotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2'-phospho-[ligated tRNA] + NAD+ = mature tRNA + ADP ribose 1'',2''-phosphate + nicotinamide + H2O. This reaction is the transfer of the splice junction 2-phosphate from ligated tRNA to NAD+ to produce ADP-ribose 1'-2' cyclic phosphate.
0016741	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring one-carbon groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a one-carbon group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0008168	name:Name:methyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:methylase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a methyl group to an acceptor molecule.
0015067	name:Name:amidinotransferase activity	name:Synonym:transamidinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reversible transfer of an amidino group to an acceptor.
0016742	name:Name:hydroxymethyl-, formyl- and related transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a hydroxymethyl- or formyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016743	name:Name:carboxyl- or carbamoyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:carboxyl- and carbamoyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a carboxyl- or carbamoyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016744	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring aldehyde or ketonic groups	name:Synonym:transketolase or transaldolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an aldehyde or ketonic group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0003984	name:Name:acetolactate synthase activity	name:Synonym:acetohydroxy acid synthetase activity	name:Synonym:acetohydroxyacid synthase activity	name:Synonym:acetolactate pyruvate-lyase (carboxylating) activity	name:Synonym:acetolactic synthetase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-acetohydroxy acid synthetase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-acetohydroxyacid synthase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-acetolactate synthase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-acetolactate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate:pyruvate acetaldehydetransferase (decarboxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 pyruvate = 2-acetolactate + CO2.
0004801	name:Name:sedoheptulose-7-phosphate:D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate glyceronetransferase activity	name:Synonym:dihydroxyacetone transferase activity	name:Synonym:dihydroxyacetonetransferase activity	name:Synonym:glycerone transferase activity	name:Synonym:transaldolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sedoheptulose 7-phosphate + D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate = D-erythrose 4-phosphate + D-fructose 6-phosphate.
0004802	name:Name:transketolase activity	name:Synonym:fructose 6-phosphate:D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate glycolaldehydetransferase activity	name:Synonym:glycoaldehyde transferase activity	name:Synonym:glycolaldehydetransferase activity	name:Synonym:sedoheptulose-7-phosphate:D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate glycolaldehydetransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reversible transfer of a 2-carbon ketol group (CH2OH-CO-) from a ketose phosphate donor to an aldose phosphate acceptor.
0008661	name:Name:1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate pyruvate-lyase (carboxylating) activity	name:Synonym:1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:DOXP synthase activity	name:Synonym:DXP-synthase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate:D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate acetaldehydetransferase (decarboxylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + H(+) + pyruvate = 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate + CO(2).
0033191	name:Name:macrophomate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a 2-pyrone + oxalacetate = macrophomate.
0033806	name:Name:fluorothreonine transaldolase activity	name:Synonym:fluoroacetaldehyde:L-threonine aldehydetransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-threonine + fluoroacetaldehyde = acetaldehyde + 4-fluoro-L-threonine.
0047156	name:Name:acetoin-ribose-5-phosphate transaldolase activity	name:Synonym:1-deoxy-D-altro-heptulose-7-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-deoxy-D-altro-heptulose-7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-hydroxybutan-2-one:D-ribose-5-phosphate aldehydetransferase activity	name:Synonym:3-hydroxybutan-3-one:D-ribose-5-phosphate aldehydetransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-ribose 5-phosphate + acetoin = 1-deoxy-D-altro-heptulose 7-phosphate + acetaldehyde.
0047896	name:Name:formaldehyde transketolase activity	name:Synonym:D-xylulose-5-phosphate:formaldehyde glycolaldehydetransferase activity	name:Synonym:DHAS activity	name:Synonym:dihydroxyacetone synthase activity	name:Synonym:glycerone synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-xylulose 5-phosphate + formaldehyde = glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + glycerone.
0050439	name:Name:2-hydroxy-3-oxoadipate synthase activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxy-3-oxoadipate glyoxylate-lyase (carboxylating) activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxy-3-oxoadipate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoglutarate:glyoxylate succinaldehydetransferase (decarboxylating)	name:Synonym:alpha-ketoglutaric-glyoxylic carboligase activity	name:Synonym:oxoglutarate: glyoxylate carboligase activity	name:Synonym:oxoglutarate:glyoxylate carboligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-oxoglutarate + glyoxylate + H(+) = 2-hydroxy-3-oxoadipate + CO(2).
0070204	name:Name:2-succinyl-5-enolpyruvyl-6-hydroxy-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxylic-acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:MenD	name:Synonym:SEPHCHC synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-oxoglutarate + H(+) + isochorismate = 5-enolpyruvoyl-6-hydroxy-2-succinyl-cyclohex-3-ene-1-carboxylate + CO(2).
0016746	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring acyl groups	name:Synonym:acyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an acyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016747	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring acyl groups other than amino-acyl groups	name:Synonym:transferase activity, transferring groups other than amino-acyl groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an acyl group, other than amino-acyl, from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016755	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring amino-acyl groups	name:Synonym:aminoacyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an amino-acyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0046912	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring acyl groups, acyl groups converted into alkyl on transfer	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an acyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor), with the acyl group being converted into alkyl on transfer.
0016757	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring glycosyl groups	name:Synonym:glycosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:transferase activity, transferring other glycosyl groups	name:Synonym:transglycosidase activity	name:Synonym:transglycosylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a glycosyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0008194	name:Name:UDP-glycosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a glycosyl group from a UDP-sugar to a small hydrophobic molecule.
0008373	name:Name:sialyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of sialylglycoconjugates via transfer of the sialic acid group from CMP to one of several glycoconjugate acceptors.
0008920	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide heptosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:LPS heptosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a lipopolysaccharide + ADP-L-glycero-beta-D-manno-heptose = a heptosylated lipopolysaccharide + ADP + H+.
0008933	name:Name:lytic transglycosylase activity	name:Synonym:murein transglycosylase B activity	name:Synonym:peptidoglycan lytic transglycosylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the specific cleavage of the beta-1,4 glycosidic linkage between N-acetylmuramyl and N-acetylglucosaminyl residues in peptidoglycan, with the concomitant formation of 1,6-anhydro-N-acetylmuramyl residues.
0008961	name:Name:phosphatidylglycerol-prolipoprotein diacylglyceryl transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of the diacylglyceryl group from phosphatidylglycerol to the sulfhydryl group of the prospective N-terminal cysteine residue in an unmodified prolipoprotein.
0016758	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring hexosyl groups	name:Synonym:hexosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a hexosyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016763	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring pentosyl groups	name:Synonym:pentosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a pentosyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016765	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring alkyl or aryl (other than methyl) groups	name:Synonym:transferase activity, transferring alkyl or aryl groups, other than methyl groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an alkyl or aryl (but not methyl) group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0000010	name:Name:trans-hexaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-heptaprenyl-diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-hexaprenyl-diphosphate:isopentenyl-diphosphate hexaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:heptaprenyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:heptaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:heptaprenyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-hexaprenyl diphosphate + isopentenyl diphosphate = all-trans-heptaprenyl diphosphate + diphosphate.
0003849	name:Name:3-deoxy-7-phosphoheptulonate synthase activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphoheptonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphoheptonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:2-keto-3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptonic acid 7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-arabino-2-heptulosonic acid 7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptolosonate-7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:7-phospho-2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptonate	name:Synonym:7-phospho-2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptonate D-erythrose-4-phosphate lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:7-phospho-2-keto-3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptonate D-erythrose-4-phosphate lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:D-erythrose-4-phosphate-lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:D-erythrose-4-phosphate-lyase activity	name:Synonym:DAH7-P synthase activity	name:Synonym:DAHP synthase activity	name:Synonym:deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:DHAP synthase activity	name:Synonym:DS-Co activity	name:Synonym:DS-Mn activity	name:Synonym:KDPH synthase activity	name:Synonym:KDPH synthetase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-dehydro-3-deoxyheptonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-keto-3-deoxyheptanoate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-keto-3-deoxyheptonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-keto-3-deoxyheptonic aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-oxo-3-deoxyheptonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:D-erythrose-4-phosphate C-(1-carboxyvinyl)transferase (phosphate-hydrolysing, 2-carboxy-2-oxoethyl-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-erythrose 4-phosphate + H(2)O + phosphoenolpyruvate = 7-phospho-2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptonate + phosphate.
0003866	name:Name:3-phosphoshikimate 1-carboxyvinyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:3-enol-pyruvoylshikimate-5-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:EPSP synthase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:3-phosphoshikimate 5-O-(1-carboxyvinyl)-transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-phosphoshikimate + phosphoenolpyruvate = 5-O-(1-carboxyvinyl)-3-phosphoshikimate + phosphate.
0003961	name:Name:O-acetylhomoserine aminocarboxypropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:4.2.99.9	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-homoserine acetate-lyase (adding methanethiol) activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-homoserine sulfhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-homoserine:methanethiol 3-amino-3-carboxypropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetylhomoserine (thiol)-lyase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:OAH sulfhydrylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-acetyl-L-homoserine + methanethiol = L-methionine + acetate.
0003962	name:Name:cystathionine gamma-synthase activity	name:Synonym:CTT gamma synthase activity	name:Synonym:cystathionine g-synthase activity	name:Synonym:cystathionine gamma synthase activity	name:Synonym:cystathionine synthase activity	name:Synonym:cystathionine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:homoserine O-transsuccinylase activity	name:Synonym:homoserine transsuccinylase activity	name:Synonym:O-succinyl-L-homoserine (thiol)-lyase activity	name:Synonym:O-succinyl-L-homoserine succinate-lyase (adding cysteine) activity	name:Synonym:O-succinyl-L-homoserine succinate-lyase activity	name:Synonym:O-succinylhomoserine (thiol)-lyase activity	name:Synonym:O-succinylhomoserine synthase activity	name:Synonym:O-succinylhomoserine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:O4-succinyl-L-homoserine:L-cysteine S-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-succinyl-L-homoserine + L-cysteine = cystathionine + succinate.
0004156	name:Name:dihydropteroate synthase activity	name:Synonym:(2-amino-4-hydroxy-7,8-dihydropteridin-6-yl)methyl-diphosphate:4-aminobenzoate 2-amino-4-hydroxydihydropteridine-6-methenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropteridine-diphosphate:4-aminobenzoate 2-amino-4-hydroxydihydropteridine-6-methenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:7,8-dihydropteroate synthase activity	name:Synonym:7,8-dihydropteroate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:7,8-dihydropteroic acid synthetase activity	name:Synonym:DHPS activity	name:Synonym:dihydropteroate diphosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:dihydropteroate pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:dihydropteroate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:dihydropteroic synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropteridine diphosphate + 4-aminobenzoate = diphosphate + dihydropteroate.
0004364	name:Name:glutathione transferase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione conjugation reaction	name:Synonym:glutathione S-alkyl transferase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione S-alkyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione S-aralkyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione S-aryltransferase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione S-transferase activity	name:Synonym:RX:glutathione R-transferase activity	name:Synonym:S-(hydroxyalkyl)glutathione lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: R-X + glutathione = H-X + R-S-glutathione. R may be an aliphatic, aromatic or heterocyclic group; X may be a sulfate, nitrile or halide group.
0004418	name:Name:hydroxymethylbilane synthase activity	name:Synonym:(4-(2-carboxyethyl)-3-(carboxymethyl)pyrrol-2-yl)methyltransferase (hydrolyzing) activity	name:Synonym:(4-[2-carboxyethyl]-3-[carboxymethyl]pyrrol-2-yl)methyltransferase (hydrolysing)	name:Synonym:HMB-synthase activity	name:Synonym:porphobilinogen ammonia-lyase (polymerizing)	name:Synonym:porphobilinogen deaminase activity	name:Synonym:porphobilinogen:(4-[2-carboxyethyl]-3-[carboxymethyl]pyrrol-2-yl)methyltransferase (hydrolysing)	name:Synonym:pre-uroporphyrinogen synthase activity	name:Synonym:uroporphyrinogen I synthase activity	name:Synonym:uroporphyrinogen I synthetase activity	name:Synonym:uroporphyrinogen synthase activity	name:Synonym:uroporphyrinogen synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + 4 porphobilinogen = hydroxymethylbilane + 4 NH(4)(+).
0004478	name:Name:methionine adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:adenosylmethionine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:AdoMet synthetase activity	name:Synonym:ATP-methionine adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP:L-methionine S-adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:methionine S-adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:methionine-activating enzyme	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethionine synthase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethionine synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + L-methionine + H2O = phosphate + diphosphate + S-adenosyl-L-methionine.
0004659	name:Name:prenyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a prenyl group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0004746	name:Name:riboflavin synthase activity	name:Synonym:6,7-dimethyl-8-(1-D-ribityl)lumazine:6,7-dimethyl-8-(1-D-ribityl)lumazine 2,3-butanediyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:heavy riboflavin synthase	name:Synonym:light riboflavin synthase	name:Synonym:lumazine synthase activity	name:Synonym:riboflavin synthetase activity	name:Synonym:riboflavine synthase activity	name:Synonym:riboflavine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B2 synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 6,7-dimethyl-8-(1-D-ribityl)lumazine + H(+) = 5-amino-6-(D-ribitylamino)uracil + riboflavin.
0004766	name:Name:spermidine synthase activity	name:Synonym:aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:putrescine aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethioninamine:putrescine 3-aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:SpeE	name:Synonym:spermidine synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosylmethioninamine + putrescine = 5'-methylthioadenosine + spermidine.
0004789	name:Name:thiamine-phosphate diphosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:2-methyl-4-amino-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine-diphosphate:4-methyl-5-(2-phosphoethyl)thiazole 2-methyl-4-aminopyrimidine-5-methenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin-phosphate diphosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin-phosphate pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine monophosphate pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine phosphate pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine-phosphate pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:TMP diphosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:TMP pyrophosphorylase activity	name:Synonym:TMP-PPase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-amino-2-methyl-5-diphosphomethylpyrimidine + 4-methyl-5-(2-phosphoethyl)-thiazole + H(+) = diphosphate + thiamine phosphate.
0008609	name:Name:alkylglycerone-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-acyl-glycerone-3-phosphate:long-chain-alcohol O-3-phospho-2-oxopropanyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:alkyl DHAP synthetase activity	name:Synonym:alkyl-DHAP	name:Synonym:alkyl-DHAP synthase activity	name:Synonym:alkyldihydroxyacetone phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:alkyldihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:DHAP-AT	name:Synonym:dihydroxyacetone-phosphate acyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-acyl-glycerone 3-phosphate + a long-chain alcohol = 1-alkyl-glycerone 3-phosphate + a long-chain acid anion.
0008676	name:Name:3-deoxy-8-phosphooctulonate synthase activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-octonate-8-phosphate D-arabinose-5-phosphate-lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphooctonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphooctonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:2-keto-3-deoxy-8-phosphooctonic synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate-8-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid 8-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-mannooctulosonate-8-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxyoctulosonic 8-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:KDO-8-P synthase activity	name:Synonym:KDO-8-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:KDOP synthase activity	name:Synonym:phospho-2-keto-3-deoxyoctonate aldolase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:D-arabinose-5-phosphate C-(1-carboxyvinyl)transferase (phosphate-hydrolysing, 2-carboxy-2-oxoethyl-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-arabinose 5-phosphate + H(2)O + phosphoenolpyruvate = 8-phospho-3-deoxy-D-manno-oct-2-ulosonate + 2 H(+) + phosphate.
0008760	name:Name:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:enoylpyruvate transferase activity	name:Synonym:MurA transferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate-UDP-acetylglucosamine-3-enolpyruvyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:UDP-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucose 2-enoyl-1-carboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:UDP-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:uridine diphosphate N-acetylglucosamine enolpyruvyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:uridine-5'-diphospho-N-acetyl-2-amino-2-deoxyglucose 3-enolpyruvyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphopyruvate-uridine diphosphoacetylglucosamine pyruvatetransferase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate-UDP-acetylglucosamine transferase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate-uridine diphospho-N-acetyl-glucosamine transferase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate-uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine transferase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvic-uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyl-transferase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine enoylpyruvyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: phosphoenolpyruvate + UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-glucosamine = phosphate + UDP-N-acetyl-3-O-(1-carboxyvinyl)-D-glucosamine.
0008817	name:Name:cob(I)yrinic acid a,c-diamide adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:aquacob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:aquocob(I)alamin vitamin B12s adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP:cob(I)alamin Co-beta-adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP:cob(I)alamin cobeta-adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP:cob(I)yrinic acid-a,c-diamide cobeta-adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP:corrinoid adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:cob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:CobA	name:Synonym:vitamin B12s adenosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + cob(I)alamin + H2O = phosphate + diphosphate + adenosylcobalamin.
0009824	name:Name:AMP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:AMP 2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:AMP delta2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:adenylate dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:adenylate isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:cytokinin synthase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:AMP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:isopentenyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AMP + dimethylallyl diphosphate = N(6)-(dimethylallyl)adenosine 5'-phosphate + diphosphate.
0010487	name:Name:thermospermine synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methioninamine + spermidine = S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + thermospermine + H+.
0016432	name:Name:tRNA-uridine aminocarboxypropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:tRNA-uridine 3-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine + tRNA uridine = 5'-methylthioadenosine + tRNA 3-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-uridine.
0016768	name:Name:spermine synthase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethioninamine:spermidine 3-aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:spermidine aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:spermine synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosylmethioninamine + spermidine = 5'-methylthioadenosine + spermine.
0030410	name:Name:nicotianamine synthase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:S-adenosyl-L-methionine 3-amino-3-carboxypropyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3 S-adenosyl-L-methionine(1+) = 3 S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + 3 H(+) + nicotianamine.
0033844	name:Name:galactose-6-sulfurylase activity	name:Synonym:D-galactose-6-sulfate:alkyltransferase (cyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:galactose 6-sulfatase activity	name:Synonym:galactose-6-sulfatase activity	name:Synonym:porphyran sulfatase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the elimination of sulfate from the D-galactose 6-sulfate residues of porphyran, producing 3,6-anhydrogalactose residues.
0033846	name:Name:adenosyl-fluoride synthase activity	name:Synonym:fluorinase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:fluoride adenosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine + fluoride = 5'-deoxy-5'-fluoroadenosine + L-methionine.
0033847	name:Name:O-phosphoserine sulfhydrylase activity	name:Synonym:O-phospho-L-serine:hydrogen-sulfide 2-amino-2-carboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:O-phosphoserine(thiol)-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-phospho-L-serine + hydrogen sulfide = L-cysteine + phosphate.
0033848	name:Name:N2-(2-carboxyethyl)arginine synthase activity	name:Synonym:CEA synthetase activity	name:Synonym:CEAS	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate:L-arginine 2-N-(2-hydroxy-3-oxopropyl) transferase (2-carboxyethyl-forming) activity	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate:L-arginine N2-(2-hydroxy-3-oxopropyl) transferase (2-carboxyethyl-forming) activity	name:Synonym:N2-(2-carboxyethyl)arginine synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + L-arginine = N(2)-(2-carboxyethyl)-L-arginine + H(+) + phosphate.
0033849	name:Name:chrysanthemyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:CPPase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:dimethylallyl-diphosphate dimethylallyltransferase (chrysanthemyl-diphosphate-forming) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 dimethylallyl diphosphate = (R,R)-chrysanthemyl diphosphate + diphosphate.
0033850	name:Name:Z-farnesyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:(Z)-farnesyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:geranyl-diphosphate:isopentenyl-diphosphate geranylcistransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: geranyl diphosphate + isopentenyl diphosphate = 2-cis,6-trans-farnesyl diphosphate + diphosphate.
0033851	name:Name:lavandulyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:dimethylallyl-diphosphate dimethylallyltransferase (lavandulyl-diphosphate-forming) activity	name:Synonym:FDS-5	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 dimethylallyl diphosphate = diphosphate + lavandulyl diphosphate.
0034038	name:Name:deoxyhypusine synthase activity	name:Synonym:eIF-5A-deoxyhypusine synthase activity	name:Synonym:eIF5A-precursor-lysine:spermidine 4-aminobutyltransferase (propane-1,3-diamine-forming) activity	name:Synonym:spermidine:eIF5A-lysine 4-aminobutyltransferase (propane-1,3-diamine-forming) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: [eIF5A-precursor]-lysine + spermidine = [eIF5A-precursor]-deoxyhypusine + propane-1,3-diamine. Four sub-reactions have been identified,in which the intermediates remain tightly associated with the enzyme: spermidine + NAD+ = dehydrospermidine + NADH; dehydrospermidine + [enzyme]-lysine = N-(4-aminobutylidene)-[enzyme]-lysine + propane-1,3-diamine; N-(4-aminobutylidene)-[enzyme]-lysine + [eIF5A-precursor]-lysine = N-(4-aminobutylidene)-[eIF5A-precursor]-lysine + [enzyme]-lysine; N-(4-aminobutylidene)-[eIF5A-precursor]-lysine + NADH + H+ = [eIF5A-precursor]-deoxyhypusine + NAD+.
0043766	name:Name:Sep-tRNA:Cys-tRNA synthase activity	name:Synonym:O-phosphoseryl-tRNA:cysteinyl-tRNA synthase activity	name:Synonym:Sep-tRNA:Cys-tRNA synthetase activity	name:Synonym:SepCysS	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-phospho-L-seryl-tRNACys + sulfide = L-cysteinyl-tRNACys + phosphate.
0043918	name:Name:cadaverine aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:cadaverine aminopropyl transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosylmethioninamine + cadaverine = 5'-methylthioadenosine + N-(3-aminopropyl)cadaverine.
0043919	name:Name:agmatine aminopropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:agmatine aminopropyl transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: agmatine + S-adenosylmethioninamine = N1-aminopropylagmatine + 5'-methylthioadenosine.
0047292	name:Name:trihydroxypterocarpan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:(6aS,11aS)-3,6a,9-trihydroxypterocarpan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:(6aS,11aS)-3,6a,9-trihydroxypterocarpan dimethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallylpyrophosphate:3,6a,9-trihydroxypterocarpan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallylpyrophosphate:trihydroxypterocarpan dimethylallyl transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (6AS,11AS)-3,6A,9-trihydroxypterocarpan + dimethylallyl-pyrophosphate = glyceollin + diphosphate.
0047294	name:Name:phosphoglycerol geranylgeranyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyl diphosphate:sn-glyceryl phosphate geranylgeranyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyl-transferase activity	name:Synonym:glycerol phosphate geranylgeranyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sn-glycerol 1-phosphate + all-trans-geranylgeranyl diphosphate = sn-3-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol 1-phosphate + diphosphate.
0047295	name:Name:geranylgeranylglycerol-phosphate geranylgeranyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyl diphosphate:sn-3-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol 1-phosphate geranylgeranyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyloxyglycerol phosphate geranylgeranyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyltransferase II	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sn-3-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol 1-phosphate + all-trans-geranylgeranyl diphosphate = 2,3-di-O-(geranylgeranyl)glycerol 1-phosphate + diphosphate.
0047296	name:Name:homospermidine synthase activity	name:Synonym:putrescine:putrescine 4-aminobutyltransferase (ammonia-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 putrescine = NH3 + sym-homospermidine.
0047444	name:Name:N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminate 9-phosphate lyase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminate 9-phosphate sialic acid 9-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminate 9-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminic acid phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphate pyruvate-lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:N-acyl-D-mannosamine-6-phosphate 1-(2-carboxy-2-oxoethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:sialic acid 9-phosphate synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2O + phosphoenolpyruvate + N-acyl-D-mannosamine 6-phosphate = phosphate + N-acylneuraminate 9-phosphate.
0047458	name:Name:beta-pyrazolylalanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-O-acetyl-L-serine:pyrazole 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:beta-(1-pyrazolyl)alanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-pyrazolealanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-pyrazolylalanine synthase (acetylserine) activity	name:Synonym:BPA-synthase activity	name:Synonym:O(3)-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding pyrazole) activity	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding pyrazole)	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine:pyrazole 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:pyrazolealanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:pyrazolylalaninase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-acetyl-L-serine + pyrazole = 3-(pyrazol-1-yl)-L-alanine + acetate + H(+).
0047625	name:Name:adenosylmethionine cyclotransferase activity	name:Synonym:adenosyl methionine cyclotransferase activity	name:Synonym:adenosylmethioninase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine alkyltransferase (cyclizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine(1+) = S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + homoserine lactone.
0047691	name:Name:aspulvinone dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl pyrophosphate:aspulvinone dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:aspulvinone-E dimethylallyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: aspulvinone E + 2 dimethylallyl diphosphate = aspulvinone H + 2 diphosphate.
0047870	name:Name:discadenine synthase activity	name:Synonym:discadenine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:6-N-(Delta2-isopentenyl)-adenine 3-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-transferase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:N6-(Delta2-isopentenyl)-adenine 3-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-transferas	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N(6)-dimethylallyladenine + S-adenosyl-L-methionine(1+) = S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + discadenine + H(+).
0048045	name:Name:trans-pentaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-hexaprenyl-diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-pentaprenyl-diphosphate:isopentenyl-diphosphate pentaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:hexaprenyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:hexaprenyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-pentaprenyl diphosphate + isopentenyl diphosphate = all-trans-hexaprenyl diphosphate + diphosphate.
0050007	name:Name:isonocardicin synthase activity	name:Synonym:nocardicin aminocarboxypropyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine:nocardicin-E 3-amino-3-carboxypropyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine(1+) + nocardicin E = S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + H(+) + isonocardicin A.
0050267	name:Name:rubber cis-polyprenylcistransferase activity	name:Synonym:cis-prenyl transferase activity	name:Synonym:isopentenyl pyrophosphate cis-1,4-polyisoprenyl transferase activity	name:Synonym:poly-cis-polyprenyl-diphosphate:isopentenyl-diphosphate polyprenylcistransferase activity	name:Synonym:rubber allyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:rubber polymerase activity	name:Synonym:rubber prenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:rubber transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: poly-cis-polyprenyl diphosphate + isopentenyl diphosphate = diphosphate + a poly-cis-polyprenyl diphosphate longer by one C5 unit.
0050314	name:Name:sym-norspermidine synthase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethioninamine:propane-1,3-diamine 3-aminopropyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,3-diaminopropane + S-adenosylmethioninamine = S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + bis(3-aminopropyl)amine + H(+).
0050332	name:Name:thiamine pyridinylase activity	name:Synonym:pyrimidine transferase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin pyridinolase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin pyridinylase activity	name:Synonym:thiamin:base 2-methyl-4-aminopyrimidine-5-methenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:thiaminase I activity	name:Synonym:thiamine hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine pyridinolase activity	name:Synonym:thiamine:base 2-methyl-4-aminopyrimidine-5-methenyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pyridine + thiamine = 5-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole + heteropyrithiamine.
0050347	name:Name:trans-octaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:(E)-octaprenyl-diphosphate:isopentenyl-diphosphate octaprenyltranstransferase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-nonaprenyl-diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:nonaprenyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:polyprenylpyrophosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:solanesyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:solanesyl-diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:SPP synthase activity	name:Synonym:terpenoidallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:terpenyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:trans-prenyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-octaprenyl diphosphate + isopentenyl diphosphate = all-trans-nonaprenyl diphosphate + diphosphate.
0050364	name:Name:tryptophan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:4-(gamma,gamma-dimethylallyl)tryptophan synthase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:L-tryptophan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallylpyrophosphate:L-tryptophan dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallylpyrophosphate:tryptophan dimethylallyl transferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyltryptophan synthetase activity	name:Synonym:DMAT synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dimethylallyl diphosphate + L-tryptophan = diphosphate + 4-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-L-tryptophan.
0050447	name:Name:zeatin 9-aminocarboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:3-O-acetyl-L-serine:zeatin 2-amino-2-carboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:beta-(9-cytokinin)-alanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-(9-cytokinin)alanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:lupinate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:lupinic acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:lupinic acid synthetase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding N(6)-substituted adenine) activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding N6-substituted adenine)	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine:zeatin 2-amino-2-carboxyethyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-acetyl-L-serine + zeatin = L-lupinate + acetate + H(+).
0050461	name:Name:L-mimosine synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-O-acetyl-L-serine:3,4-dihydroxypyridine 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:O(3)-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding 3,4-dihydroxypyridin-1-yl) activity	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding 3,4-dihydroxypyridin-1-yl)	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine:3,4-dihydroxypyridine 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3,4-dihydroxypyridine + O-acetyl-L-serine = 3-(3,4-dihydroxypyridinium-1-yl)-L-alanine + acetate.
0050462	name:Name:N-acetylneuraminate synthase activity	name:Synonym:(NANA)condensing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminate pyruvate-lyase (pyruvate-phosphorylating) activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylneuraminic acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:NeuAc synthase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate:N-acetyl-D-mannosamine C-(1-carboxyvinyl)transferase (phosphate-hydrolysing, 2-carboxy-2-oxoethyl-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: phosphoenolpyruvate + N-acetyl-D-mannosamine + H2O = phosphate + N-acetylneuraminate.
0050471	name:Name:uracilylalanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-O-acetyl-L-serine:uracil 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:isowillardiine synthase activity	name:Synonym:O(3)-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding uracil) activity	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding uracil)	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine:uracil 1-(2-amino-2-carboxyethyl)transferase activity	name:Synonym:willardiine synthase activity	name:Synonym:Willardiine synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O3-acetyl-L-serine + uracil = 3-(uracil-1-yl)-L-alanine + acetate.
0050514	name:Name:homospermidine synthase (spermidine-specific) activity	name:Synonym:spermidine:putrescine 4-aminobutyltransferase (propane-1,3-diamine-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: spermidine + putrescine = sym-homospermidine + propane-1,3-diamine.
0052381	name:Name:tRNA dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:tRNA dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA prenyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dimethylallyl diphosphate + tRNA = diphosphate + tRNA containing 6-dimethylallyladenosine.
0052622	name:Name:ATP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:ATP 2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:ATP delta2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ATP isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:ATP dimethylallyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: delta(2)-isopentenyl diphosphate + ATP = diphosphate + N6-(delta(2)-isopentenyl)adenosine 5'-triphosphate.
0052623	name:Name:ADP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:ADP 2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:2-isopentenyl-diphosphate:ADP delta2-isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ADP dimethylallyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:ADP isopentenyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl-diphosphate:ADP dimethylallyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: delta2-isopentenyl diphosphate + ADP = diphosphate + N6-(delta(2)-isopentenyl)adenosine 5'-diphosphate.
0016769	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring nitrogenous groups	name:Synonym:transferase activity, transferring other nitrogenous groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a nitrogenous group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0008483	name:Name:transaminase activity	name:Synonym:aminotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an amino group to an acceptor, usually a 2-oxo acid.
0016770	name:Name:oximinotransaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reversible transfer of an oxime group to an acceptor.
0033856	name:Name:pyridoxine 5'-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate:3-amino-2-oxopropyl phosphate 3-amino-2-oxopropyltransferase (phosphate-hydrolysing; cyclizing) activity	name:Synonym:PdxJ	name:Synonym:PNP synthase activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxine 5-phosphate phospho lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate + 3-amino-2-oxopropyl phosphate = 2 H(2)O + H(+) + phosphate + pyridoxine 5'-phosphate.
0035605	name:Name:peptidyl-cysteine S-nitrosylase activity	name:Synonym:protein nitrosylase activity	name:Synonym:S-nitrosylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a nitric oxide (NO) group to a sulphur atom within a cysteine residue of a protein.
0047839	name:Name:dATP(dGTP)-DNA purinetransferase activity	name:Synonym:dATP(dGTP)--DNA purine transferase activity	name:Synonym:dATP(dGTP):depurinated-DNA purine transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dATP + depurinated DNA = ribose triphosphate + DNA.
0016772	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring phosphorus-containing groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphorus-containing group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016301	name:Name:kinase activity	name:Synonym:phosphokinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphate group, usually from ATP, to a substrate molecule.
0016773	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, alcohol group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphorus-containing group from one compound (donor) to an alcohol group (acceptor).
0016774	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, carboxyl group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphorus-containing group from one compound (donor) to a carboxyl group (acceptor).
0016775	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, nitrogenous group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphorus-containing group from one compound (donor) to a nitrogenous group (acceptor).
0016776	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, phosphate group as acceptor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphorus-containing group from one compound (donor) to a phosphate group (acceptor).
0016778	name:Name:diphosphotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a diphosphate group from one compound (donor) to a another (acceptor).
0016779	name:Name:nucleotidyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a nucleotidyl group to a reactant.
0016780	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, for other substituted phosphate groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a substituted phosphate group, other than diphosphate or nucleotidyl residues, from one compound (donor) to a another (acceptor).
0016781	name:Name:phosphotransferase activity, paired acceptors	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of two phosphate groups from a donor, such as ATP, to two different acceptors.
0016782	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring sulfur-containing groups	name:Synonym:transferase activity, transferring sulphur-containing groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a sulfur-containing group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0008146	name:Name:sulfotransferase activity	name:Synonym:sulphotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a sulfate group from 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate to the hydroxyl group of an acceptor, producing the sulfated derivative and 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphate.
0008410	name:Name:CoA-transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a coenzyme A (CoA) group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016783	name:Name:sulfurtransferase activity	name:Synonym:sulphurtransferase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA sulfurtransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of sulfur atoms from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0050497	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring alkylthio groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an alkylthio group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0016785	name:Name:transferase activity, transferring selenium-containing groups	name:Synonym:selenotransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a selenium-containing group from one compound (donor) to another (acceptor).
0004125	name:Name:L-seryl-tRNASec selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:cysteinyl-tRNA(Sec)-selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:cysteinyl-tRNA(Sel)-selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:cysteinyl-tRNA(Ser) selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:cysteinyl-tRNASec-selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:cysteinyl-tRNASel-selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:L-selenocysteinyl-tRNA(Sec) synthase activity	name:Synonym:L-selenocysteinyl-tRNA(Sel) synthase activity	name:Synonym:L-selenocysteinyl-tRNASec synthase activity	name:Synonym:L-selenocysteinyl-tRNASel synthase activity	name:Synonym:L-seryl-tRNA(Ser) selenium transferase activity	name:Synonym:selenocysteine synthase activity	name:Synonym:selenocysteinyl-tRNA(Ser) synthase activity	name:Synonym:selenophosphate:L-seryl-tRNASec selenium transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-seryl-tRNA(Sec) + selenophosphate = L-selenocysteinyl-tRNA(Sec) + H2O + phosphate.
0043828	name:Name:tRNA 2-selenouridine synthase activity	name:Synonym:B0503	name:Synonym:SelU	name:Synonym:YbbB	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine + selenophosphate = 5-methylaminomethyl-2-selenouridine + phosphate (at the wobble position in tRNA).
0042123	name:Name:glucanosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the splitting and linkage of glucan molecules, resulting in glucan chain elongation.
0042124	name:Name:1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the splitting and linkage of 1,3-beta-glucan molecules, resulting in 1,3-beta-glucan chain elongation.
0043842	name:Name:Kdo transferase activity	name:Synonym:3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic-acid transferase activity	name:Synonym:kdtA	name:Synonym:WaaA	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: (KDO)-lipid IVA + CMP-3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate = KDO2-lipid IVA + CMP, and lipid IVA + CMP-3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate = (KDO)-lipid IVA + CMP.
0051075	name:Name:S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosylmethionine + 7-(aminomethyl)-7-deazaguanosine-tRNA = adenine + methionine + epoxyqueuosine-tRNA. 7-(aminomethyl)-7-deazaguanosine-tRNA is also known as preQ1-tRNA, and epoxyqueuosine-tRNA as oQ-tRNA.
0016787	name:Name:hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of various bonds, e.g. C-O, C-N, C-C, phosphoric anhydride bonds, etc. Hydrolase is the systematic name for any enzyme of EC class 3.
0003832	name:Name:beta-alanyl-dopamine hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-beta-alanyl-dopamine hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:NBAD hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of beta-alanyl dopamine to dopamine (3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine).
0003923	name:Name:GPI-anchor transamidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of the linkage between a protein and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. The reaction probably occurs by subjecting a peptide bond to nucleophilic attack by the amino group of ethanolamine-GPI, transferring the protein from a signal peptide to the GPI anchor.
0008233	name:Name:peptidase activity	name:Synonym:hydrolase, acting on peptide bonds	name:Synonym:peptide hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:protease activity	name:Synonym:proteinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a peptide bond. A peptide bond is a covalent bond formed when the carbon atom from the carboxyl group of one amino acid shares electrons with the nitrogen atom from the amino group of a second amino acid.
0070010	name:Name:peptidase activity, acting on D-amino acid peptides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of peptide bonds formed between D-amino acids.
0070011	name:Name:peptidase activity, acting on L-amino acid peptides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of peptide bonds formed between L-amino acids.
0070012	name:Name:oligopeptidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a peptide bond in an oligopeptide, i.e. a molecule containing a small number (2 to 20) of amino acid residues connected by peptide bonds.
0070122	name:Name:isopeptidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an isopeptide bond. An isopeptide bond is an amide linkage between a carboxyl group of one amino acid and an amino group of another amino acid in which at least one of these groups is not on the a-carbon of one of the amino acids (for example, the link between an epsilon-amino group of a lysine molecule to a carboxyl group on a second amino acid is an isopeptide bond).
0016788	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on ester bonds	name:Synonym:esterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any ester bond.
0004518	name:Name:nuclease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of ester linkages within nucleic acids.
0008484	name:Name:sulfuric ester hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:sulfatase activity	name:Synonym:sulphuric ester hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: RSO-R' + H2O = RSOOH + R'H. This reaction is the hydrolysis of any sulfuric ester bond, any ester formed from sulfuric acid, O=SO(OH)2.
0008849	name:Name:enterochelin esterase activity	name:Synonym:enterobactin esterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of the enterochelin group of ferric-enterochelin to yield ultimately three molecules of N-2,3-dihydroxybenzoylserine.
0016298	name:Name:lipase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a lipid or phospholipid.
0016790	name:Name:thiolester hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:thiolesterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: RCO-SR' + H2O = RCOOH + HSR'. This reaction is the hydrolysis of a thiolester bond, an ester formed from a carboxylic acid and a thiol (i.e., RCO-SR'), such as that found in acetyl-coenzyme A.
0042578	name:Name:phosphoric ester hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: RPO-R' + H2O = RPOOH + R'H. This reaction is the hydrolysis of any phosphoric ester bond, any ester formed from orthophosphoric acid, O=P(OH)3.
0045330	name:Name:aspartyl esterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an ester bond by a mechanism involving a catalytically active aspartic acid residue.
0052689	name:Name:carboxylic ester hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a carboxylic ester to give an alcohol and a carboxylate.
0016798	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on glycosyl bonds	name:Synonym:glycosidase activity	name:Synonym:glycosylase	name:Synonym:N-glycosylase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any glycosyl bond.
0004553	name:Name:hydrolase activity, hydrolyzing O-glycosyl compounds	name:Synonym:O-glucosyl hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any O-glycosyl bond.
0016799	name:Name:hydrolase activity, hydrolyzing N-glycosyl compounds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any N-glycosyl bond.
0016801	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on ether bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any ether or thioether bond, -O- or -S- respectively.
0016802	name:Name:trialkylsulfonium hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:thioether hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:trialkylsulphonium hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a thioether bond, -S-.
0016803	name:Name:ether hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an ether bond, -O-.
0016810	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in other compounds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any carbon-nitrogen bond, C-N, with the exception of peptide bonds.
0008660	name:Name:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid deaminase activity	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate aminohydrolase (isomerizing)	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate endolyase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:ACC deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate + H(2)O = 2-oxobutanate + NH(4)(+).
0009392	name:Name:N-acetyl-anhydromuramoyl-L-alanine amidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: GlcNAc-1,6-anhMurNAc-L-Ala-gamma-D-Glu-DAP-D-Ala + H2O glcNAc-1,6-anhMurNAc + L-Ala-gamma-D-Glu-DAP-D-Ala.
0010178	name:Name:IAA-amino acid conjugate hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of the amide bond between IAA (auxin) and the conjugated amino acid.
0016811	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in linear amides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any non-peptide carbon-nitrogen bond in a linear amide.
0016812	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in cyclic amides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any non-peptide carbon-nitrogen bond in a cyclic amide.
0016813	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in linear amidines	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any non-peptide carbon-nitrogen bond in a linear amidine, a compound of the form R-C(=NH)-NH2.
0016814	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in cyclic amidines	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any non-peptide carbon-nitrogen bond in a cyclic amidine, a compound of the form R-C(=NH)-NH2.
0016815	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-nitrogen (but not peptide) bonds, in nitriles	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any non-peptide carbon-nitrogen bond in a nitrile, a compound containing the cyano radical, -CN.
0018763	name:Name:hydroxydechloroatrazine ethylaminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:4-(ethylamino)-2-hydroxy-6-(isopropylamino)-1,3,5-triazine ethylaminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:AtzB	name:Synonym:hydroxyatrazine ethylaminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:hydroxyatrazine hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-(ethylamino)-2-hydroxy-6-(isopropylamino)-1,3,5-triazine + H2O = N-isopropylammelide + ethylamine.
0018764	name:Name:N-isopropylammelide isopropylaminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:AtzC	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-isopropylammelide + H2O = cyanuric acid + isopropylamine.
0034544	name:Name:trans-ACOHDA hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trans-4-amino-6-carboxy-2-oxo-hexa-3,5-dienoate + H2O = fumarylpyruvate + NH3.
0034565	name:Name:1-nitro-1,2-dihydro-1,3,5-triazine hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-nitro-1,2-dihydro-1,3,5-triazine + 2 H2O = 1-nitro-1,3,5-triazinane-2,4-diol.
0034886	name:Name:gamma-aminovinylacetate deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: gamma-aminovinylacetate + H2O = succinic semialdehyde + NH3.
0034896	name:Name:3-formiminopyruvate hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-formiminopyruvate + H2O = 3-formylpyruvate + HN3.
0034900	name:Name:3-(N-formyl)-formiminopyruvate hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-(N-formyl)-formiminopyruvate + H2O = 3-formiminopyruvate + formate.
0034958	name:Name:aminohydroquinone monooxygenase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: aminohydroquinone + 2 e- + 2 H+ + 1/2 O2 = 1,2,4-benzenetriol + NH3.
0050258	name:Name:riboflavinase activity	name:Synonym:riboflavin hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + H(+) + riboflavin = D-ribitol + lumichrome.
0050334	name:Name:thiaminase activity	name:Synonym:thiaminase II activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + thiamine = 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine + 5-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole + H(+).
0050540	name:Name:2-aminomuconate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2-aminomuconate aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-aminomuconate + H(2)O + H(+) = (Z)-5-oxohex-2-enedioate + NH(4)(+).
0016817	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides, involved in cellular and subcellular movement	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid anhydride.
0016818	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides, in phosphorus-containing anhydrides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid anhydride which contains phosphorus.
0016819	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides, in sulfonyl-containing anhydrides	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides, in sulphonyl-containing anhydrides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid anhydride which contains a sulfonyl group, -SO2-.
0016820	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid anhydrides, catalyzing transmembrane movement of substances	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an acid anhydride to directly drive the transport of a substance across a membrane.
0016822	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid carbon-carbon bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid carbon-carbon bond.
0016823	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid carbon-carbon bonds, in ketonic substances	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid carbon-carbon bond in a ketonic substance, a substance containing a keto (C=O) group.
0016824	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid halide bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid halide bond.
0019120	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid halide bonds, in C-halide compounds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid halide bond in substances containing halogen atoms in organic linkage.
0016825	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid phosphorus-nitrogen bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid phosphorus-nitrogen bond.
0050187	name:Name:phosphoamidase activity	name:Synonym:creatine phosphatase activity	name:Synonym:phosphamide hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-phosphocreatine + H(2)O = creatine + phosphate.
0016826	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid sulfur-nitrogen bonds	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on acid sulphur-nitrogen bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid sulfur-nitrogen bond.
0016250	name:Name:N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-desoxy-D-glucoside-2-sulphamate sulphohydrolase (sulphamate sulphohydrolase)	name:Synonym:heparin sulfamidase activity	name:Synonym:N-sulfo-D-glucosamine sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-sulphoglucosamine sulphohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:sulfoglucosamine sulfamidase activity	name:Synonym:sulphamidase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-sulfo-D-glucosamine + H2O = D-glucosamine + sulfate.
0018789	name:Name:cyclamate sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cyclamate sulfamatase activity	name:Synonym:cyclamate sulfamidase activity	name:Synonym:cyclamate sulphohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cyclohexylsulfamate sulfamidase activity	name:Synonym:cyclohexylsulfamate sulfohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cyclohexylsulfamate + H(2)O = cyclohexylamine + sulfate.
0016827	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid carbon-phosphorus bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid carbon-phosphorus bond.
0033978	name:Name:phosphonopyruvate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:PPH	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-phosphonopyruvate + H(2)O = phosphate + pyruvate.
0047400	name:Name:phosphonoacetate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:phosphonoacetate phosphonohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + phosphonoacetate = acetate + H(+) + phosphate.
0050194	name:Name:phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoethylphosphonate phosphonohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-phosphonoacetylaldehyde phosphonohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:phosphonatase activity	name:Synonym:phosphonoacetylaldehyde phosphonohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + phosphonoacetaldehyde = acetaldehyde + H(+) + phosphate.
0016828	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on acid sulfur-sulfur bonds	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on acid sulphur-sulphur bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any acid sulfur-sulfur bond.
0047401	name:Name:trithionate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:trithionate thiosulfohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(2)O + trithionate = H(+) + sulfate + thiosulfate.
0017171	name:Name:serine hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of a substrate by a catalytic mechanism that involves a catalytic triad consisting of a serine nucleophile that is activated by a proton relay involving an acidic residue (e.g. aspartate or glutamate) and a basic residue (usually histidine).
0008236	name:Name:serine-type peptidase activity	name:Synonym:serine protease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of peptide bonds in a polypeptide chain by a catalytic mechanism that involves a catalytic triad consisting of a serine nucleophile that is activated by a proton relay involving an acidic residue (e.g. aspartate or glutamate) and a basic residue (usually histidine).
0019213	name:Name:deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an acetyl group or groups from a substrate molecule.
0000225	name:Name:N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:6-(N-acetyl-alpha-D-glucosaminyl)-1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylase activity	name:Synonym:GlcNAc-PI deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-D-glucosaminylphosphatidylinositol acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol de-N-acetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-D-glucosaminylphosphatidylinositol + H2O = D-glucosaminylphosphatidylinositol + acetate. This reaction is the second step of the biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI), used to anchor various eukaryotic proteins to the cell-surface membrane.
0004099	name:Name:chitin deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:chitin amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: chitin + H2O = chitosan + acetate.
0008448	name:Name:N-acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucose-6-phosphate amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetylaminodeoxyglucosephosphate acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetylglucosamine phosphate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-D-glucosamine-6-phosphate amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-phosphate + H2O = D-glucosamine 6-phosphate + acetate.
0008759	name:Name:UDP-3-O-[3-hydroxymyristoyl] N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of an acetyl group from the 2-N position of glucosamine in the lipid A precursor UDP-3-O-(R-3-hydroxymyristoyl)-N-acetylglucosamine.
0008777	name:Name:acetylornithine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:2-N-acetyl-L-ornithine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetylornithinase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylornithinase activity	name:Synonym:N2-acetyl-L-ornithine amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N2-acetyl-L-ornithine + H2O = acetate + L-ornithine.
0033558	name:Name:protein deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an acetyl group or groups from a protein substrate.
0034084	name:Name:steryl deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:sterol deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of an acetyl group or groups from an acetylated sterol.
0035595	name:Name:N-acetylglucosaminylinositol deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:GlcNAc-Ins deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-1D-myo-inositol-2-amino-2-deoxy-alpha-D-glucopyranoside deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1D-myo-inositol 2-acetamido-2-deoxy-alpha-D-glucopyranoside + H2O = 1D-myo-inositol 2-amino-2-deoxy-alpha-D-glucopyranoside + acetate. This reaction is the hydrolysis of an acetyl group from N-acetylglucosaminylinositol.
0047373	name:Name:acetoxybutynylbithiophene deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:5-(4-acetoxy-1-butynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene:acetate esterase activity	name:Synonym:5-(4-acetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene O-acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetoxybutynylbithiophene esterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-(4-acetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene + H(2)O = 5-(4-hydroxy-but-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene + acetate + H(+).
0047374	name:Name:methylumbelliferyl-acetate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:4-methylumbelliferyl-acetate acylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:esterase D activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-methylumbelliferyl acetate + H(2)O = 4-methylumbelliferone + acetate + H(+).
0047375	name:Name:N-acetylgalactosaminoglycan deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl galactosaminoglycan deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-D-galactosaminoglycan acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:polysaccharide deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:Vi-polysaccharide deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2O + N-acetyl-D-galactosaminoglycan = acetate + D-galactosaminoglycan.
0047377	name:Name:5-(3,4-diacetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:3,4-diacetoxybutinylbithiophene:4-acetate esterase activity	name:Synonym:5-(3,4-diacetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:diacetoxybutynylbithiophene acetate esterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-(3,4-diacetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene + H(2)O = 5-(3-hydroxy-4-acetoxybut-1-ynyl)-2,2'-bithiophene + acetate + H(+).
0047419	name:Name:N-acetylgalactosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H2O + N-acetyl-D-galactosamine 6-phosphate = acetate + D-galactosamine 6-phosphate.
0047573	name:Name:4-acetamidobutyrate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:4-acetamidobutanoate amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-acetamidobutanoate + H2O = acetate + 4-aminobutanoate.
0047574	name:Name:4-acetamidobutyryl-CoA deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:4-acetamidobutanoyl-CoA amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:aminobutyryl-CoA thiolesterase activity	name:Synonym:deacetylase-thiolesterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-acetamidobutanoyl-CoA + H(2)O = 4-aminobutanoyl-CoA + acetate.
0047593	name:Name:6-acetylglucose deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:6-acetyl-D-glucose acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:6-O-acetylglucose deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 6-acetyl-D-glucose + H(2)O = D-glucose + acetate + H(+).
0047609	name:Name:acetylputrescine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylputrescine acetylhydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetylputrescine + H(2)O = acetate + putrescine.
0047610	name:Name:acetylsalicylate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:acetylsalicylate O-acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acetylsalicylic acid esterase activity	name:Synonym:aspirin esterase activity	name:Synonym:aspirin hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: acetylsalicylate + H(2)O = acetate + H(+) + salicylate.
0047611	name:Name:acetylspermidine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:8-N-acetylspermidine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N(1)-acetylspermidine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N(8)-acetylspermidine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N(8)-acetylspermidine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N(8)-monoacetylspermidine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetylspermidine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N1-acetylspermidine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N8-acetylspermidine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N8-acetylspermidine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N8-monoacetylspermidine deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N(8)-acetylspermidine + H(2)O = acetate + spermidine.
0047739	name:Name:cephalosporin-C deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin acetylesterase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin C acetyl-esterase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin C acetyl-hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin C acetylase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin C acetylesterase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin C deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:cephalosporin-C acetylhydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cephalosporin C + H(2)O = acetate + deacetylcephalosporin C + H(+).
0050117	name:Name:N-acetyl-beta-alanine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-beta-alanine amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-beta-alanine + H(2)O = beta-alanine + acetate.
0050118	name:Name:N-acetyldiaminopimelate deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:6-N-acetyl-LL-2,6-diaminoheptanedioate amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-L-diaminopimelic acid deacylase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-LL-diaminopimelate deacylase activity	name:Synonym:N6-acetyl-LL-2,6-diaminoheptanedioate amidohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-LL-2,6-diaminopimelate + H(2)O = LL-2,6-diaminopimelate + acetate.
0050119	name:Name:N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase activity	name:Synonym:acetylaminodeoxyglucose acetylhydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-D-glucosamine amidohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:N-acetyl-D-glucosaminyl N-deacetylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-D-glucosamine + H(2)O = D-glucosamine + acetate.
0031964	name:Name:beta-alanyl-histamine hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:carcinine hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of beta-alanyl-histamine to histamine.
0046508	name:Name:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-sulfur bonds	name:Synonym:hydrolase activity, acting on carbon-sulphur bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the hydrolysis of any carbon-sulfur bond, C-S.
0018740	name:Name:2'-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sulfinate desulfinase activity	name:Synonym:2'-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sulfinate sulfinolyase activity	name:Synonym:2'-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sulfinate sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)benzenesulfinate desulfinase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-hydroxyphenyl) benzenesulfinate sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-hydroxyphenyl) benzenesulfinate:H2O hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzenesulfinate desulfinase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzenesulfinate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)benzenesulphinate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:dibenzothiophene desulfurization enzyme B	name:Synonym:DszB	name:Synonym:gene dszB-encoded hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:HBPSi desulfinase activity	name:Synonym:HPBS desulfinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2'-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sulfinate + H(2)O = biphenyl-2-ol + sulfite.
0034861	name:Name:benzothiazole-2-sulfonate hydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: benzothiazole-2-sulfonate + H2O = 2-hydroxybenzothiazole + HSO3-.
0046507	name:Name:UDPsulfoquinovose synthase activity	name:Synonym:sulfite:UDP-glucose sulfotransferase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-6-sulfo-6-deoxyglucose sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-sulfoquinovose synthase activity	name:Synonym:UDPsulphoquinovose synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sulfite + UDP-D-glucose = H(2)O + UDP-6-sulfoquinovose.
0051747	name:Name:cytosine C-5 DNA demethylase activity	name:Synonym:DNA demethylase activity	name:Synonym:DNA methyltransferase activity acting on cytosine C-5	name:Synonym:hydrolytic DNA demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methyl-dCpdG DNA + H2O = dCpdG DNA + methanol. This reaction is the hydrolytic removal of the methyl group on the 5 position of cytosine in DNA.
0016829	name:Name:lyase activity	name:Synonym:other lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of C-C, C-O, C-N and other bonds by other means than by hydrolysis or oxidation, or conversely adding a group to a double bond. They differ from other enzymes in that two substrates are involved in one reaction direction, but only one in the other direction. When acting on the single substrate, a molecule is eliminated and this generates either a new double bond or a new ring.
0004325	name:Name:ferrochelatase activity	name:Synonym:ferro-protoporphyrin chelatase activity	name:Synonym:heme synthase activity	name:Synonym:heme synthetase activity	name:Synonym:iron chelatase activity	name:Synonym:protoheme ferro-lyase (protoporphyrin-forming)	name:Synonym:protoheme ferro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:protoheme ferrolyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: protoheme = Fe(2+) + protoporphyrin IX.
0051266	name:Name:sirohydrochlorin ferrochelatase activity	name:Synonym:CysG	name:Synonym:Met8P	name:Synonym:SirB	name:Synonym:siroheme ferro-lyase (sirohydrochlorin-forming)	name:Synonym:siroheme synthase activity	name:Synonym:sirohydrochlorin ferro-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: siroheme OK = Fe(2+) + sirohydrochlorin.
0016830	name:Name:carbon-carbon lyase activity	name:Synonym:other carbon-carbon lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of C-C bonds by other means than by hydrolysis or oxidation, or conversely adding a group to a double bond.
0003913	name:Name:DNA photolyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the repair of a photoproduct resulting from ultraviolet irradiation of two adjacent pyrimidine residues in DNA.
0008686	name:Name:3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone-4-phosphate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-ribulose 5-phosphate = (2S)-2-hydroxy-3-oxobutyl phosphate + formate + H(+).
0009034	name:Name:tryptophanase activity	name:Synonym:L-tryptophan indole-lyase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:L-tryptophan indole-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate forming) activity	name:Synonym:L-tryptophan indole-lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-tryptophanase activity	name:Synonym:TNase activity	name:Synonym:tryptophan catabolic process, using tryptophanase	name:Synonym:tryptophan catabolism, using tryptophanase	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-tryptophan + H(2)O = indole + NH(4)(+) + pyruvate.
0016831	name:Name:carboxy-lyase activity	name:Synonym:decarboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the nonhydrolytic addition or removal of a carboxyl group to or from a compound.
0016832	name:Name:aldehyde-lyase activity	name:Synonym:aldolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a C-C bond in a molecule containing a hydroxyl group and a carbonyl group to form two smaller molecules, each being an aldehyde or a ketone.
0016833	name:Name:oxo-acid-lyase activity	name:Synonym:oxo-acid lyase activity	name:Synonym:oxoacid lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a C-C bond by other means than by hydrolysis or oxidation, of a 3-hydroxy acid.
0018805	name:Name:benzylsuccinate synthase activity	name:Synonym:benzylsuccinate fumarate-lyase (toluene-forming)	name:Synonym:benzylsuccinate fumarate-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: fumarate + toluene = 2-benzylsuccinate.
0034579	name:Name:(1-methylpentyl)succinate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: fumarate + n-hexane = (1-methylpentyl)succinate.
0050371	name:Name:tyrosine phenol-lyase activity	name:Synonym:beta-tyrosinase activity	name:Synonym:L-tyrosine phenol-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:L-tyrosine phenol-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-tyrosine + H(2)O = NH(4)(+) + phenol + pyruvate.
0071771	name:Name:aldehyde decarbonylase activity	name:Synonym:decarbonylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a C(n) aldehyde = C(n-1) alkane + CO.
0016835	name:Name:carbon-oxygen lyase activity	name:Synonym:other carbon-oxygen lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the breakage of a carbon-oxygen bond.
0003906	name:Name:DNA-(apurinic or apyrimidinic site) lyase activity	name:Synonym:AP endonuclease class I activity	name:Synonym:AP lyase activity	name:Synonym:AP site-DNA 5'-phosphomonoester-lyase activity	name:Synonym:deoxyribonuclease (apurinic or apyrimidinic) activity	name:Synonym:DNA-(apurinic or apyrimidinic site) 5'-phosphomonoester-lyase activity	name:Synonym:E. coli endonuclease III	name:Synonym:E. coli endonuclease III activity	name:Synonym:endodeoxyribonuclease (apurinic or apyrimidinic) activity	name:Synonym:endonuclease VIII activity	name:Synonym:micrococcus luteus UV endonuclease	name:Synonym:Micrococcus luteus UV endonuclease activity	name:Synonym:Phage-T(4) UV endonuclease activity	name:Synonym:phage-T4 UV endonuclease	name:Synonym:Phage-T4 UV endonuclease activity	name:Synonym:X-ray endonuclease III	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of the C-O-P bond 3' to the apurinic or apyrimidinic site in DNA by a beta-elimination reaction, leaving a 3'-terminal unsaturated sugar and a product with a terminal 5'-phosphate.
0004124	name:Name:cysteine synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-O-acetyl-L-serine:hydrogen-sulfide 2-amino-2-carboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:acetylserine sulfhydrylase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:O(3)-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding hydrogen-sulfide) activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-serine sulfhydrylase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetyl-L-serine sulfohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetylserine (thiol)-lyase A activity	name:Synonym:O-acetylserine (thiol)-lyase activity	name:Synonym:O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase activity	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine acetate-lyase (adding hydrogen-sulfide)	name:Synonym:O3-acetyl-L-serine:hydrogen-sulfide 2-amino-2-carboxyethyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:OAS sulfhydrylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O3-acetyl-L-serine + hydrogen sulfide = L-cysteine + acetate.
0016836	name:Name:hydro-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a carbon-oxygen bond by elimination of water.
0016837	name:Name:carbon-oxygen lyase activity, acting on polysaccharides	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a carbon-oxygen bond by the elimination of an alcohol from a polysaccharide.
0016838	name:Name:carbon-oxygen lyase activity, acting on phosphates	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a carbon-oxygen bond by elimination of a phosphate.
0047772	name:Name:carboxymethyloxysuccinate lyase activity	name:Synonym:carboxymethyloxysuccinate glycolate-lyase (fumarate-forming)	name:Synonym:carboxymethyloxysuccinate glycolate-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: carboxymethoxysuccinate = fumarate + glycolate.
0051009	name:Name:O-acetylhomoserine sulfhydrylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: O-acetyl-L-homoserine + hydrogen sulfide = homocysteine + acetate.
0051575	name:Name:5'-deoxyribose-5-phosphate lyase activity	name:Synonym:5'-deoxyribose phosphate activity	name:Synonym:dRP lyase activity	name:Synonym:dRPase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the beta-elimination of the 5' deoxyribose-5-phosphate at an abasic site in DNA where a DNA-(apurinic or apyrimidinic site) lyase has already cleaved the C-O-P bond 3' to the apurinic or apyrimidinic site.
0070205	name:Name:2-succinyl-6-hydroxy-2,4-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylate synthase activity	name:Synonym:2-succinyl-6-hydroxy-2,4-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylic acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:6-hydroxy-2-succinylcyclohexa-2,4-diene-1-carboxylate synthase activity	name:Synonym:MenH	name:Synonym:SHCHC synthase activity	name:Synonym:YfbB	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-enolpyruvoyl-6-hydroxy-2-succinyl-cyclohex-3-ene-1-carboxylate = (1R,6R)-2-succinyl-6-hydroxycyclohexa-2,4-diene-1-carboxylate + pyruvate.
0016840	name:Name:carbon-nitrogen lyase activity	name:Synonym:other carbon-nitrogen lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the release of ammonia or one of its derivatives, with the formation of a double bond or ring. Enzymes with this activity may catalyze the actual elimination of the ammonia, amine or amide, e.g. CH-CH(-NH-R) = C=CH- + NH2-R. Others, however, catalyze elimination of another component, e.g. water, which is followed by spontaneous reactions that lead to breakage of the C-N bond, e.g. L-serine ammonia-lyase (EC:4.3.1.17), so that the overall reaction is C(-OH)-CH(-NH2) = CH2-CO- + NH3, i.e. an elimination with rearrangement. The sub-subclasses of EC:4.3 are the ammonia-lyases (EC:4.3.1), lyases acting on amides, amidines, etc. (EC:4.3.2), the amine-lyases (EC:4.3.3), and other carbon-nitrogen lyases (EC:4.3.99).
0008824	name:Name:cyanate hydratase activity	name:Synonym:carbamate hydro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cyanase activity	name:Synonym:cyanate aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cyanate C-N-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cyanate hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cyanate lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cyanate + H2O = carbamate.
0016841	name:Name:ammonia-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the release of ammonia by the cleavage of a carbon-nitrogen bond or the reverse reaction with ammonia as a substrate.
0016842	name:Name:amidine-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the release of amides or amidines by the cleavage of a carbon-nitrogen bond or the reverse reaction with an amide or amidine as a substrate.
0016843	name:Name:amine-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the release of amides by the cleavage of a carbon-nitrogen bond or the reverse reaction with an amine as a substrate.
0016846	name:Name:carbon-sulfur lyase activity	name:Synonym:carbon-sulphur lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the elimination of hydrogen sulfide or substituted H2S.
0004121	name:Name:cystathionine beta-lyase activity	name:Synonym:beta C-S lyase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cystathionase activity	name:Synonym:cystathionine L-homocysteine-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:cystine lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-cystathionine L-homocysteine-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:L-cystathionine L-homocysteine-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cystathionine + H2O = L-homocysteine + NH3 + pyruvate.
0004123	name:Name:cystathionine gamma-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cystalysin	name:Synonym:cystathionase activity	name:Synonym:cystathioninase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine desulfhydrase activity	name:Synonym:cystine desulfhydrase activity	name:Synonym:gamma-CTL	name:Synonym:gamma-cystathionase activity	name:Synonym:homoserine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:homoserine deaminase-cystathionase activity	name:Synonym:homoserine dehydratase activity	name:Synonym:L-cystathionine cysteine-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:L-cystathionine cysteine-lyase (deaminating; 2-oxobutanoate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-cystathionine + H2O = L-cysteine + NH3 + 2-oxobutanoate.
0004408	name:Name:holocytochrome-c synthase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome c heme-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome c synthase activity	name:Synonym:holocytochrome c synthetase activity	name:Synonym:holocytochrome-c apocytochrome-c-lyase (heme-forming)	name:Synonym:holocytochrome-c apocytochrome-c-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: holocytochrome c = apocytochrome c + heme.
0004462	name:Name:lactoylglutathione lyase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-S-lactoylglutathione methylglyoxal-lyase (isomerizing) activity	name:Synonym:(R)-S-lactoylglutathione methylglyoxal-lyase (isomerizing; glutathione-forming)	name:Synonym:aldoketomutase activity	name:Synonym:glyoxalase I activity	name:Synonym:glyoxylase I	name:Synonym:ketone-aldehyde mutase activity	name:Synonym:methylglyoxalase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-S-lactoylglutathione = glutathione + methylglyoxal.
0004464	name:Name:leukotriene-C4 synthase activity	name:Synonym:(7E,9E,11Z,14Z)-(5S,6R)-5,6-epoxyicosa-7,9,11,14-tetraenoate:glutathione leukotriene-transferase (epoxide-ring-opening)	name:Synonym:(7E,9E,11Z,14Z)-(5S,6R)-6-(glutathion-S-yl)-5-hydroxyicosa-7,9,11,14-tetraenoate glutathione-lyase (epoxide-forming)	name:Synonym:leukotriene A(4):glutathione S-leukotrienyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:leukotriene A4:glutathione S-leukotrienyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:leukotriene C(4) synthetase activity	name:Synonym:leukotriene C4 synthetase activity	name:Synonym:leukotriene-C4 glutathione-lyase (leukotriene-A4-forming)	name:Synonym:LTC(4) synthase activity	name:Synonym:LTC(4) synthetase activity	name:Synonym:LTC4 synthase activity	name:Synonym:LTC4 synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: leukotriene C(4) = glutathione + leukotriene A(4).
0008826	name:Name:cysteine sulfinate desulfinase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine sulphinate desulphinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-sulfinoalanine = L-alanine + sulfite.
0009000	name:Name:selenocysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-selenocysteine selenide-lyase (L-alanine-forming)	name:Synonym:selenocysteine beta-lyase activity	name:Synonym:selenocysteine reductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-selenocysteine + reduced acceptor = hydrogen selenide + L-alanine + acceptor.
0016847	name:Name:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropanecarboxylate synthase activity	name:Synonym:ACC synthase activity	name:Synonym:aminocyclopropanecarboxylate synthase activity	name:Synonym:aminocyclopropanecarboxylic acid synthase activity	name:Synonym:L-VG deaminase activity	name:Synonym:L-vinylglycine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine methylthioadenosine-lyase (1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate-forming)	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-methionine methylthioadenosine-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-methionine(1+) = 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate + S-methyl-5'-thioadenosine + H(+).
0018826	name:Name:methionine gamma-lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-methioninase activity	name:Synonym:L-methionine gamma-lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-methionine methanethiol-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:L-methionine methanethiol-lyase (deaminating; 2-oxobutanoate-forming)	name:Synonym:methioninase activity	name:Synonym:methionine dethiomethylase activity	name:Synonym:methionine lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-methionine = methanethiol + NH3 + 2-oxobutanoate.
0019148	name:Name:D-cysteine desulfhydrase activity	name:Synonym:D-cysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:D-cysteine sulfide-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:D-cysteine sulfide-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-cysteine + H2O = sulfide + NH3 + pyruvate.
0034010	name:Name:sulfolactate sulfo-lyase activity	name:Synonym:3-sulfolactate bisulfite-lyase (pyruvate-forming) activity	name:Synonym:3-sulfolactate bisulfite-lyase activity	name:Synonym:Suy	name:Synonym:SuyAB	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-sulfolactate = pyruvate + sulfite.
0034011	name:Name:L-cysteate sulfo-lyase activity	name:Synonym:CuyA	name:Synonym:L-cysteate bisulfite-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming) activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteate sulfo-lyase (deaminating) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-cysteate + H(2)O = NH(4)(+) + pyruvate + sulfite.
0034860	name:Name:2-mercaptobenzothiazole desulfurase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-mercaptobenzothiazole + reduced acceptor = benzothiazole + hydrogen sulfide + oxidized acceptor.
0043768	name:Name:S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:3.2.1.148	name:Synonym:LuxS	name:Synonym:ribosylhomocysteinase activity	name:Synonym:S-(5-deoxy-D-ribos-5-yl)-L-homocysteine homocysteine-lyase [(4S)-4,5-dihydroxypentan-2,3-dione-forming]	name:Synonym:S-ribosylhomocysteinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-(5-deoxy-D-ribos-5-yl)-L-homocysteine = (S)-4,5-dihydroxypentane-2,3-dione + L-homocysteine.
0043817	name:Name:phosphosulfolactate synthase activity	name:Synonym:(2R)-O-phospho-3-sulfolactate sulfo-lyase (phosphoenolpyruvate-forming)	name:Synonym:(2R)-O-phospho-3-sulfolactate sulfo-lyase activity	name:Synonym:(2R)-phospho-3-sulfolactate synthase activity	name:Synonym:PSL synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (2R)-O-phospho-3-sulfolactate = phosphoenolpyruvate + sulfite.
0047654	name:Name:alliin lyase activity	name:Synonym:alkylcysteine sulfoxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:alliin alkyl-sulfenate-lyase activity	name:Synonym:alliinase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine sulfoxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine sulphoxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteine sulfoxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteine S-oxide alkyl-sulfenate-lyase (2-aminoacrylate-forming)	name:Synonym:S-alkylcysteine sulfoxide lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: an S-alkyl-L-cysteine S-oxide = an alkyl sulfenate + 2-aminoacrylate.
0047803	name:Name:cysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine (sulfite) lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (adding sulfite)	name:Synonym:L-cysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (adding sulfite; L-cysteate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-cysteine + sulfite = L-cysteate + sulfide.
0047804	name:Name:cysteine-S-conjugate beta-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine conjugate beta-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cysteine-S-conjugate b-lyase activity	name:Synonym:glutamine transaminase K/cysteine conjugate beta-lyase activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteine-S-conjugate thiol-lyase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteine-S-conjugate thiol-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: RS-CH2-CH(NH3+)COO- = RSH + NH3 + pyruvate.
0047869	name:Name:dimethylpropiothetin dethiomethylase activity	name:Synonym:desulfhydrase activity	name:Synonym:S,S-dimethyl-beta-propiothetin dimethyl-sulfide-lyase (acrylate-forming)	name:Synonym:S,S-dimethyl-beta-propiothetin dimethyl-sulfide-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S,S-dimethyl-beta-propiothetin = acrylate + dimethyl sulfide + H(+).
0047982	name:Name:homocysteine desulfhydrase activity	name:Synonym:homocysteine desulfurase activity	name:Synonym:L-homocysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:L-homocysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (deaminating; 2-oxobutanoate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-homocysteine + H2O = sulfide + NH3 + 2-oxobutanoate.
0050017	name:Name:L-3-cyanoalanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cyano-L-alanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cyanoalanine synthase activity	name:Synonym:beta-cyanoalanine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:L-cysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (adding HCN)	name:Synonym:L-cysteine hydrogen-sulfide-lyase (adding hydrogen cyanide; L-3-cyanoalanine-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-cysteine + HCN = sulfide + L-3-cyanoalanine.
0050271	name:Name:S-alkylcysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:alkyl cysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:alkylcysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteinase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteine alkylthiol-lyase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteine alkylthiol-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteine lyase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkyl-L-cysteine sulfoxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkylcysteinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: an S-alkyl-L-cysteine + H2O = an alkyl thiol + NH3 + pyruvate.
0050312	name:Name:sulfoacetaldehyde lyase activity	name:Synonym:sulphoacetaldehyde lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-sulfoacetaldehyde + H2O = acetate + sulfite.
0050555	name:Name:2-hydroxypropyl-CoM lyase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-2-hydroxypropyl-CoM 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate lyase (cyclizing; epoxyalkane-ring-forming)	name:Synonym:(R)-[or (S)-]2-hydroxypropyl-CoM:2-mercaptoethanesulfonate lyase (epoxyalkane-ring-forming)	name:Synonym:2-hydroxypropyl-CoM:2-mercaptoethanesulfonate lyase (epoxyalkane-ring-forming)	name:Synonym:coenzyme M-epoxyalkane ligase activity	name:Synonym:EaCoMT activity	name:Synonym:epoxyalkane:2-mercaptoethanesulfonate transferase activity	name:Synonym:epoxyalkane:coenzyme M transferase activity	name:Synonym:epoxyalkane:CoM transferase activity	name:Synonym:epoxyalkyl:CoM transferase activity	name:Synonym:epoxypropane:coenzyme M transferase activity	name:Synonym:epoxypropyl:CoM transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: (R)-2-hydroxypropyl-CoM = H-S-CoM + (R)-1,2-epoxypropane, and (S)-2-hydroxypropyl-CoM = H-S-CoM + (S)-1,2-epoxypropane.
0051907	name:Name:S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione synthase activity	name:Synonym:Gfa	name:Synonym:glutathione-dependent formaldehyde-activating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione formaldehyde-lyase (glutathione-forming)	name:Synonym:S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione formaldehyde-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-(hydroxymethyl)glutathione = formaldehyde + glutathione.
0080108	name:Name:S-alkylthiohydroximate lyase activity	name:Synonym:S-alkylthiohydroximate C-S lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of a S-alkylthiohydroximate to a thiohydroximate.
0080146	name:Name:L-cysteine desulfhydrase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-cysteine + H2O = ammonia + pyruvate + hydrogen sulfide + H+.
0016848	name:Name:carbon-halide lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the breakage of a bond between carbon and any halogen atom.
0018827	name:Name:1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:DDMS dehydrochlorinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane = HCl + unsym-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene. 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane is also known as DDMS; unsym-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene is also known as DDNU.
0018829	name:Name:1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:DDD dehydrochlorinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane = HCl + 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene. 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane is also known as DDD; 1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethene is also known as DDMU.
0018830	name:Name:gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane dehydrochlorinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane + HCl = 1,3(R),4(S),5(S),6(R)-pentachlorocyclohexene.
0018831	name:Name:5-chloro-1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene dechlorinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-chloro-1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene = Cl- + H+ + 2-hydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone.
0018833	name:Name:DDT-dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane chloride-lyase [1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene-forming]	name:Synonym:1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane chloride-lyase activity	name:Synonym:DDT dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:DDT-as	name:Synonym:DDT-ase activity	name:Synonym:DDTase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane = 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene + chloride + H(+).
0018834	name:Name:dichloromethane dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:dichloromethane chloride-lyase (adding H2O; chloride-hydrolysing; formaldehyde-forming)	name:Synonym:dichloromethane chloride-lyase (chloride-hydrolysing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dichloromethane + H(2)O = 2 chloride + formaldehyde + 2 H(+).
0019149	name:Name:3-chloro-D-alanine dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:3-chloro-D-alanine chloride-lyase (deaminating)	name:Synonym:3-chloro-D-alanine chloride-lyase (deaminating; pyruvate-forming)	name:Synonym:beta-chloro-D-alanine dehydrochlorinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-chloro-D-alanine + H2O = pyruvate + chloride + NH3.
0019181	name:Name:halohydrin hydrogen-halide-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a halohydrin = an epoxide + a hydrogen halide.
0047460	name:Name:L-2-amino-4-chloropent-4-enoate dehydrochlorinase activity	name:Synonym:L-2-amino-4-chloro-4-pentenoate dehalogenase activity	name:Synonym:L-2-amino-4-chloropent-4-enoate chloride-lyase (adding H2O; deaminating; 2-oxopent-4-enoate-forming)	name:Synonym:L-2-amino-4-chloropent-4-enoate chloride-lyase (deaminating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-2-amino-4-chloropent-4-enoate + H(2)O = 2-oxopent-4-enoate + chloride + H(+) + NH(4)(+).
0050272	name:Name:S-carboxymethylcysteine synthase activity	name:Synonym:3-chloro-L-alanine chloride-lyase (adding thioglycolate)	name:Synonym:3-chloro-L-alanine chloride-lyase (adding thioglycolate; S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine-forming)	name:Synonym:S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-chloro-L-alanine + thioglycolate = S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine + chloride + H(+).
0016849	name:Name:phosphorus-oxygen lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cleavage of a phosphorus-oxygen bond by other means than by hydrolysis or oxidation, or conversely adding a group to a double bond.
0004436	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol diacylglycerol-lyase activity	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol diacyl-sn-glycerol-lyase (1D-myo-inositol-1,2-cyclic-phosphate-forming)	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol diacylglycerol-lyase (1,2-cyclic-phosphate-forming)	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidyl-D-myo-inositol inositolphosphohydrolase (cyclic-phosphate-forming)	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidylinositol phosphodiesterase activity	name:Synonym:monophosphatidylinositol phosphodiesterase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol = D-myo-inositol 1,2-cyclic phosphate + diacylglycerol.
0008685	name:Name:2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:2-phospho-4-(cytidine 5'-diphospho)-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol CMP-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:2-phospho-4-(cytidine 5'-diphospho)-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol CMP-lyase (cyclizing; 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate-forming)	name:Synonym:MECDP-synthase activity	name:Synonym:MECP synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-CDP-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2-phosphate = 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclic diphosphate + CMP.
0016852	name:Name:sirohydrochlorin cobaltochelatase activity	name:Synonym:anaerobic cobalt chelatase activity	name:Synonym:CbiK	name:Synonym:CbiX	name:Synonym:CbiXS	name:Synonym:cobalt-sirohydrochlorin cobalt-lyase (sirohydrochlorin-forming)	name:Synonym:sirohydrochlorin cobalt-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sirohydrochlorin + Co2+ = cobalt-sirohydrochlorin + 2 H+.
0018835	name:Name:carbon phosphorus lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alkylphosphonic acid = R-CH3 + phosphate. Substrates include aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) (forms methylamine), dimethylphosphinic acid (forms methylphosphonic acid), glyphosate (forms sarcosine) and methylphosphonic acid (forms phosphate).
0018836	name:Name:alkylmercury lyase activity	name:Synonym:alkylmercury mercuric-lyase (alkane-forming)	name:Synonym:alkylmercury mercuric-lyase activity	name:Synonym:organomercurial lyase activity	name:Synonym:organomercury lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: R-Hg+ + H+ = R-H + Hg2+.
0043729	name:Name:2-amino-5-formylamino-6-(5-phosphoribosylamino)pyrimidin-4(3H)-one formate-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-amino-5-formylamino-6-(5-phosphoribosylamino)pyrimidin-4(3H)-one + H2O = 2,5-diamino-6-(5-phosphoribosylamino)pyrimidin-4(3H)-one + formate.
0043779	name:Name:cobalt-precorrin-5A acetaldehyde-lyase activity	name:Synonym:cobalt-precorrin 5A acetaldehyde-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cobalt-precorrin 5A + H2O = cobalt-precorrin 5B + acetaldehyde.
0046567	name:Name:aphidicolan-16 beta-ol synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of aphidicolan-16 beta-ol from geranylgeranyl diphosphate.
0047720	name:Name:indoleacetaldoxime dehydratase activity	name:Synonym:(indol-3-yl)acetaldehyde-oxime hydro-lyase [(indol-3-yl)acetonitrile-forming]	name:Synonym:(indol-3-yl)acetaldehyde-oxime hydro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:3-indoleacetaldoxime hydro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:indole-3-acetaldehyde-oxime hydro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:indole-3-acetaldoxime hydro-lyase activity	name:Synonym:indoleacetaldoxime hydro-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (indol-3-yl)acetaldehyde oxime = (indol-3-yl)acetonitrile + H(2)O.
0016853	name:Name:isomerase activity	name:Synonym:other isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the geometric or structural changes within one molecule. Isomerase is the systematic name for any enzyme of EC class 5.
0003916	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transient cleavage and passage of individual DNA strands or double helices through one another, resulting a topological transformation in double-stranded DNA.
0003917	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase type I activity	name:Synonym:deoxyribonucleate topoisomerase	name:Synonym:DNA topoisomerase I activity	name:Synonym:nicking-closing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:omega-protein activity	name:Synonym:relaxing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:swivelase activity	name:Synonym:topoisomerase	name:Synonym:type I DNA topoisomerase activity	name:Synonym:type I topoisomerase activity	name:Synonym:untwisting enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving one DNA strand at a time to allow passage of another strand; changes the linking number by +1 per catalytic cycle.
0003918	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) activity	name:Synonym:deoxyribonucleate topoisomerase	name:Synonym:deoxyribonucleic topoisomerase activity	name:Synonym:DNA gyrase activity	name:Synonym:DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolysing)	name:Synonym:DNA topoisomerase II	name:Synonym:DNA topoisomerase IV activity	name:Synonym:DNA topoisomerase type II activity	name:Synonym:DNA-gyrase activity	name:Synonym:topoisomerase	name:Synonym:topoisomerase II	name:Synonym:type II DNA topoisomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving a pair of complementary DNA strands to form a gate through which a second double-stranded DNA segment is passed, after which the severed strands in the first DNA segment are rejoined; product release is coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis; changes the linking number in multiples of 2.
0008719	name:Name:dihydroneopterin triphosphate 2'-epimerase activity	name:Synonym:D-erythro-7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate 2'-epimerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dihydroneopterin triphosphate = dihydromonapterin-triphosphate.
0009385	name:Name:N-acylmannosamine-6-phosphate 2-epimerase activity	name:Synonym:N-acylmannosamine-6-P epimerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: N-acetyl-D-mannosamine-6-phosphate = N-acetyl-D-glucosamine-6-phosphate.
0016854	name:Name:racemase and epimerase activity	name:Synonym:racemase and epimerase activity, acting on other compounds	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that alters the configuration of one or more chiral centers in a molecule.
0004493	name:Name:methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase activity	name:Synonym:2-methyl-3-oxopropanoyl-CoA 2-epimerase activity	name:Synonym:DL-methylmalonyl-CoA racemase activity	name:Synonym:dl-methylmalonyl-CoA racemase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl coenzyme A racemase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl-CoA 2-epimerase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl-CoA racemase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-methylmalonyl-CoA = (S)-methylmalonyl-CoA.
0008111	name:Name:alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase activity	name:Synonym:2-methylacyl-CoA 2-epimerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (2S)-2-methylacyl-CoA = (2R)-2-methylacyl-CoA.
0016855	name:Name:racemase and epimerase activity, acting on amino acids and derivatives	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that alters the configuration of one or more chiral centers in an amino acid.
0016856	name:Name:racemase and epimerase activity, acting on hydroxy acids and derivatives	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that alters the configuration of one or more chiral centers in a hydroxy acid molecule.
0016857	name:Name:racemase and epimerase activity, acting on carbohydrates and derivatives	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that alters the configuration of one or more chiral centers in a carbohydrate molecule.
0047524	name:Name:16-hydroxysteroid epimerase activity	name:Synonym:16-hydroxysteroid 16-epimerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 16-alpha-hydroxysteroid = 16-beta-hydroxysteroid.
0047653	name:Name:allantoin racemase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (S)-(+)-allantoin = (R)-(-)-allantoin.
0016859	name:Name:cis-trans isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that interconverts cis and trans isomers. Atoms or groups are termed cis or trans to one another when they lie respectively on the same or on opposite sides of a reference plane identifiable as common among stereoisomers.
0003755	name:Name:peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity	name:Synonym:cis-trans proline isomerase activity	name:Synonym:cyclophilin activity	name:Synonym:cyclophilin-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity	name:Synonym:FK506-sensitive peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase	name:Synonym:immunophilin	name:Synonym:juglone-sensitive cis-trans proline isomerase activity	name:Synonym:juglone-sensitive peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity	name:Synonym:parvulin	name:Synonym:peptide bond isomerase activity	name:Synonym:peptidyl-prolyl isomerase B reaction	name:Synonym:peptidylproline cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:peptidylprolyl cis-trans isomerase activity	name:Synonym:peptidylprolyl isomerase activity	name:Synonym:PPIase activity	name:Synonym:rotamase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: peptidyl-proline (omega=180) = peptidyl-proline (omega=0).
0004744	name:Name:retinal isomerase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-retinal 11-cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:retinene isomerase activity	name:Synonym:retinoid isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-retinal = 11-cis-retinal.
0016034	name:Name:maleylacetoacetate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:4-maleylacetoacetate cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:maleylacetoacetic isomerase activity	name:Synonym:maleylacetone cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:maleylacetone isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-maleylacetoacetate = 4-fumarylacetoacetate.
0018839	name:Name:cis-4-[2-(3-hydroxy)-thionaphthenyl]-2-oxo-3-butenoate isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-4-(2-(3-hydroxy)-thionaphthenyl)-2-oxo-3-butenoate = trans-4-(2-(3-hydroxy)-thionaphthenyl)-2-oxo-3-butenoate.
0034872	name:Name:trans-geranyl-CoA isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: trans-geranyl-CoA = cis-geranyl-CoA.
0046608	name:Name:carotenoid isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the isomerization of poly-cis-carotenoids to all-trans-carotenoids.
0047466	name:Name:2-chloro-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-1,4-olide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-chloro-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-1,4-olide cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-chlorocarboxymethylenebutenolide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:chlorodienelactone isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cis-2-chloro-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-1,4-olide = trans-2-chloro-4-carboxymethylenebut-2-en-1,4-olide.
0047467	name:Name:4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde-oxime isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (E)-4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde oxime = (Z)-4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde oxime.
0047885	name:Name:farnesol 2-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-trans,6-trans-farnesol 2-cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:farnesol isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-trans,6-trans-farnesol = 2-cis,6-trans-farnesol.
0047907	name:Name:furylfuramide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide cis-trans-isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (E)-2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide = (Z)-2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide.
0050058	name:Name:linoleate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:linoleate delta12-cis-delta11-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:linoleic acid isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: linoleate = 9-cis,11-trans-octadecadienoate.
0050076	name:Name:maleate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:maleate cis-trans-isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: maleate = fumarate.
0050077	name:Name:maleylpyruvate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:3-maleylpyruvate cis-trans-isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 3-maleylpyruvate = 3-fumarylpyruvate.
0050251	name:Name:retinol isomerase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-retinol 11-cis-trans-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:all-trans-retinol isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-retinol = 11-cis-retinol.
0016860	name:Name:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:intramolecular isomerase activity	name:Synonym:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity, other intramolecular oxidoreductases	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the hydrogen donor and acceptor are the same molecule, and no oxidized product appears.
0004667	name:Name:prostaglandin-D synthase activity	name:Synonym:(5,13)-(15S)-9alpha,11alpha-epidioxy-15-hydroxyprosta-5,13-dienoate D-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:PGD2 synthase activity	name:Synonym:PGH-PGD isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin D2 synthase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin-R-prostaglandin D isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: prostaglandin H(2) = prostaglandin D(2).
0004796	name:Name:thromboxane-A synthase activity	name:Synonym:(5Z,13E)-(15S)-9alpha,11alpha-epidioxy-15-hydroxyprosta-5,13-dienoate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:(5Z,13E)-(15S)-9alpha,11alpha-epidioxy-15-hydroxyprosta-5,13-dienoate thromboxane-A2-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP5	name:Synonym:thromboxane synthase activity	name:Synonym:thromboxane synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: prostaglandin H(2) = thromboxane A(2).
0008116	name:Name:prostaglandin-I synthase activity	name:Synonym:(5Z,13E)-(15S)-9alpha,11alpha-epidioxy-15-hydroxyprosta-5,13-dienoate 6-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP8A1	name:Synonym:PGI(2) synthase activity	name:Synonym:PGI(2) synthetase activity	name:Synonym:PGI2 synthase activity	name:Synonym:PGI2 synthetase activity	name:Synonym:prostacyclin synthase activity	name:Synonym:prostacycline synthetase activity	name:Synonym:prostagladin I2 synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: prostaglandin H(2) = prostaglandin I(2).
0016861	name:Name:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity, interconverting aldoses and ketoses	name:Synonym:intramolecular isomerase activity, interconverting aldoses and ketoses	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the hydrogen donor and acceptor, which is an aldose or a ketose, are the same molecule, and no oxidized product appears.
0016862	name:Name:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity, interconverting keto- and enol-groups	name:Synonym:intramolecular isomerase activity, interconverting keto- and enol-groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the hydrogen donor and acceptor, which is a keto- or an enol-group, are the same molecule, and no oxidized product appears.
0016863	name:Name:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity, transposing C=C bonds	name:Synonym:intramolecular isomerase activity, transposing C=C bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the hydrogen donor and acceptor are the same molecule, one or more carbon-carbon double bonds in the molecule are rearranged, and no oxidized product appears.
0016864	name:Name:intramolecular oxidoreductase activity, transposing S-S bonds	name:Synonym:intramolecular isomerase activity, transposing S-S bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction in which the hydrogen donor and acceptor are the same molecule, one or more sulfur-sulfur bonds in the molecule are rearranged, and no oxidized product appears.
0018844	name:Name:2-hydroxytetrahydrofuran isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxytetrahydrofuran = 4-hydroxybutyraldehyde.
0018845	name:Name:2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxychromene-2-carboxylate = (3E)-4-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxobut-3-enoate. (3E)-4-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-2-oxobut-3-enoate is also known as trans-o-hydroxybenzylidenepyruvate.
0018846	name:Name:styrene-oxide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:SOI activity	name:Synonym:styrene oxide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:styrene-oxide isomerase (epoxide-cleaving)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: styrene oxide = phenylacetaldehyde.
0034019	name:Name:capsanthin/capsorubin synthase activity	name:Synonym:capsanthin-capsorubin synthase activity	name:Synonym:CCS	name:Synonym:ketoxanthophyll synthase activity	name:Synonym:violaxanthin-capsorubin isomerase (ketone-forming) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reactions: violaxanthin = capsorubin, and antheraxanthin = capsanthin.
0034020	name:Name:neoxanthin synthase activity	name:Synonym:NSY	name:Synonym:violaxanthin-neoxanthin isomerase (epoxide-opening) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-violaxanthin = all-trans-neoxanthin.
0034528	name:Name:2-carboxy-2-hydroxy-8-carboxychromene isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-carboxy-2-hydroxy-8-carboxychromene = 2-hydroxy-3-carboxybenzalpyruvate.
0034532	name:Name:2-hydroxy-7-hydroxymethylchromene-2-carboxylate isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxy-7-hydroxymethylchromene-2-carboxylate = 2-hydroxy-4-hydroxymethylbenzalpyruvate.
0034536	name:Name:2-hydroxy-8-methylchromene-2-carboxylate isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-hydroxy-8-methylchromene-2-carboxylate = 2-hydroxy-3-methylbenzalpyruvate.
0050220	name:Name:prostaglandin-E synthase activity	name:Synonym:(5Z,13E)-(15S)-9alpha,11alpha-epidioxy-15-hydroxyprosta-5,13-dienoate E-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:endoperoxide isomerase activity	name:Synonym:PGE isomerase activity	name:Synonym:PGE2 isomerase activity	name:Synonym:PGH-PGE isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin endoperoxide E isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin endoperoxide E2 isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin H-E isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin R-prostaglandin E isomerase activity	name:Synonym:Prostaglandin-H(2) E-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:prostaglandin-H2 E-isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: prostaglandin H(2) = prostaglandin E(2).
0016866	name:Name:intramolecular transferase activity	name:Synonym:intramolecular transferase activity, transferring other groups	name:Synonym:mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a functional group from one position to another within a single molecule.
0004106	name:Name:chorismate mutase activity	name:Synonym:chorismate pyruvatemutase activity	name:Synonym:hydroxyphenylpyruvate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: chorismate = prephenate.
0004494	name:Name:methylmalonyl-CoA mutase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-2-methyl-3-oxopropanoyl-CoA CoA-carbonylmutase activity	name:Synonym:(R)-methylmalonyl-CoA CoA-carbonylmutase activity	name:Synonym:(S)-methylmalonyl-CoA mutase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl coenzyme A carbonylmutase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase activity	name:Synonym:methylmalonyl-CoA CoA-carbonyl mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: (R)-methylmalonyl-CoA = succinyl-CoA.
0008767	name:Name:UDP-galactopyranose mutase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-D-galactopyranose furanomutase activity	name:Synonym:UDPgalactopyranose mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: UDP-D-galactopyranose = UDP-D-galacto-1,4-furanose.
0009982	name:Name:pseudouridine synthase activity	name:Synonym:transfer ribonucleate pseudouridine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:transfer RNA pseudouridine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA pseudouridylate synthase I activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-pseudouridine synthase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-pseudouridine synthase I activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-uridine isomerase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-uridine uracilmutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: RNA uridine = RNA pseudouridine. Conversion of uridine in an RNA molecule to pseudouridine by rotation of the C1'-N-1 glycosidic bond of uridine in RNA to a C1'-C5.
0016867	name:Name:intramolecular transferase activity, transferring acyl groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an acyl group from one position to another within a single molecule.
0016868	name:Name:intramolecular transferase activity, phosphotransferases	name:Synonym:phosphomutase activity	name:Synonym:phosphotransferase activity, with regeneration of donors, apparently catalyzing intramolecular transfers	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a phosphate group from one position to another within a single molecule.
0016869	name:Name:intramolecular transferase activity, transferring amino groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an amino group from one position to another within a single molecule.
0031559	name:Name:oxidosqualene cyclase activity	name:Synonym:2,3-oxidosqualene cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the cyclization of (S)-2,3-epoxysqualene to form a triterpene.
0034023	name:Name:5-(carboxyamino)imidazole ribonucleotide mutase activity	name:Synonym:5-carboxyamino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole carboxymutase activity	name:Synonym:class I PurE	name:Synonym:N5-CAIR mutase activity	name:Synonym:N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide mutase activity	name:Synonym:PurE	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-carboxyamino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole = 5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole-4-carboxylate.
0034784	name:Name:pivalyl-CoA mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pivalyl-CoA = 3-methylbutyryl-CoA.
0034951	name:Name:o-hydroxylaminobenzoate mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: o-hydroxylaminobenzoate = 3-hydroxyanthranilate.
0047469	name:Name:4-carboxymethyl-4-methylbutenolide mutase activity	name:Synonym:4-carboxymethyl-4-methylbut-2-en-1,4-olide methylmutase activity	name:Synonym:4-methyl-2-enelactone isomerase activity	name:Synonym:4-methyl-2-enelactone methyl-isomerase activity	name:Synonym:4-methyl-3-enelactone methyl isomerase activity	name:Synonym:4-methylmuconolactone methylisomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-carboxymethyl-4-methylbut-2-en-1,4-olide = 4-carboxymethyl-3-methylbut-2-en-1,4-olide.
0047470	name:Name:(1,4)-alpha-D-glucan 1-alpha-D-glucosylmutase activity	name:Synonym:(1->4)-alpha-D-glucan 1-alpha-D-glucosylmutase	name:Synonym:malto-oligosyltrehalose synthase activity	name:Synonym:maltodextrin alpha-D-glucosyltransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-(1,4-alpha-D-glucosyl)(n-1)-D-glucose = 1-alpha-D-(1,4-alpha-D-glucosyl)(n-1)-alpha-D-glucopyranoside.
0047471	name:Name:maltose alpha-D-glucosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:maltose alpha-D-glucosylmutase activity	name:Synonym:maltose glucosylmutase activity	name:Synonym:trehalose synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: maltose = trehalose.
0047534	name:Name:2-acetolactate mutase activity	name:Synonym:2-acetolactate methylmutase activity	name:Synonym:acetohydroxy acid isomerase activity	name:Synonym:acetolactate mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-acetolactate = 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate.
0047548	name:Name:2-methyleneglutarate mutase activity	name:Synonym:2-methyleneglutarate carboxy-methylenemethylmutase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-methyleneglutarate mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-methyleneglutarate = 2-methylene-3-methylsuccinate.
0047727	name:Name:isobutyryl-CoA mutase activity	name:Synonym:2-methylpropanoyl-CoA CoA-carbonylmutase activity	name:Synonym:butyryl-CoA:isobutyryl-CoA mutase activity	name:Synonym:isobutyryl coenzyme A mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: isobutyryl-CoA = butanoyl-CoA.
0050006	name:Name:isomaltulose synthase activity	name:Synonym:isomaltulose synthetase activity	name:Synonym:sucrose alpha-glucosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:sucrose glucosylmutase activity	name:Synonym:trehalulose synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sucrose = 6-O-alpha-D-glucopyranosyl-D-fructofuranose.
0050097	name:Name:methylaspartate mutase activity	name:Synonym:b-methylaspartate-glutamate mutase activity	name:Synonym:beta-methylaspartate-glutamate mutase activity	name:Synonym:glutamate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:glutamate mutase activity	name:Synonym:glutamic acid isomerase activity	name:Synonym:glutamic acid mutase activity	name:Synonym:glutamic isomerase activity	name:Synonym:glutamic mutase activity	name:Synonym:L-threo-3-methylaspartate carboxy-aminomethylmutase activity	name:Synonym:methylaspartic acid mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: threo-3-methyl-L-aspartate = L-glutamate.
0050486	name:Name:intramolecular transferase activity, transferring hydroxy groups	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a hydroxyl group from one position to another within a single molecule.
0052691	name:Name:UDP-arabinopyranose mutase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-arabinopyranose pyranomutase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-L-Ara mutase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-L-arabinopyranose furanomutase activity	name:Synonym:UDP-L-arabinose mutase activity	name:Synonym:uridine-diphosphate-L-arabinose mutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: UDP-beta-L-arabinofuranose = UDP-beta-L-arabinopyranose.
0016872	name:Name:intramolecular lyase activity	info:Definition:The catalysis of certain rearrangements of a molecule to break or form a ring.
0004512	name:Name:inositol-3-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:1L-myo-inositol-1-phosphate lyase (isomerizing)	name:Synonym:D-glucose 6-phosphate cycloaldolase activity	name:Synonym:glucocycloaldolase activity	name:Synonym:glucose 6-phosphate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:glucose-6-phosphate inositol monophosphate cycloaldolase activity	name:Synonym:inositol 1-phosphate synthatase activity	name:Synonym:inositol 1-phosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glucose 6-phosphate = 1D-myo-inositol 3-phosphate. This reaction requires NAD, which dehydrogenates the CHOH group to CO at C-5 of the glucose 6-phosphate, making C-6 into an active methylene, able to condense with the aldehyde at C-1. Finally, the enzyme-bound NADH reconverts C-5 into the CHOH form.
0009905	name:Name:ent-copalyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:diterpene cyclase activity	name:Synonym:ent-copalyl-diphosphate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:ent-kaurene synthase A activity	name:Synonym:ent-kaurene synthetase A activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-geranylgeranyl diphosphate = ent-copalyl diphosphate.
0018847	name:Name:alpha-pinene lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-pinene = limonene.
0018848	name:Name:pinocarveol isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: pinocarveol = carveol.
0018849	name:Name:muconate cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:4-carboxymethyl-4-hydroxyisocrotonolactone lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:cis,cis-muconate cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:cis,cis-muconate lactonizing enzyme I activity	name:Synonym:cis,cis-muconate-lactonizing enzyme	name:Synonym:muconate cycloisomerase I activity	name:Synonym:muconate lactonizing enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate = cis,cis-hexadienedioate.
0018850	name:Name:chloromuconate cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-chloro-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:muconate cycloisomerase II activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-chloro-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate = 3-chloro-cis,cis-muconate.
0018851	name:Name:alpha-pinene-oxide decyclase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-pinene oxide lyase activity	name:Synonym:alpha-pinene-oxide lyase (decyclizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: alpha-pinene oxide = (Z)-2-methyl-5-isopropylhexa-2,5-dienal.
0018852	name:Name:dichloromuconate cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:2,4-dichloro-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate lyase (decyclizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,4-dichloro-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate = 2,4-dichloro-cis,cis-muconate.
0034794	name:Name:cyclopropanecarboxyl-CoA decyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cyclopropanecarboxyl-CoA = crotonoyl-CoA.
0045430	name:Name:chalcone isomerase activity	name:Synonym:chalcone--flavonone isomerase activity	name:Synonym:chalcone-flavanone isomerase activity	name:Synonym:flavanone lyase (decyclizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: a chalcone = a flavanone.
0047472	name:Name:3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:2-carboxy-2,5-dihydro-5-oxofuran-2-acetate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:3-carboxymuconate lactonizing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:3-carboxymuconolactone hydrolase activity	name:Synonym:beta-carboxymuconate lactonizing enzyme activity	name:Synonym:CMLE activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-(carboxymethyl)-5-oxo-2,5-dihydro-2-furoate = 3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate + H(+).
0047793	name:Name:cycloeucalenol cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:cycloeucalenol lyase (cyclopropane-decyclizing)	name:Synonym:cycloeucalenol--obtusifoliol isomerase activity	name:Synonym:cycloeucalenol-obtusifoliol isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cycloeucalenol = obtusifoliol.
0050329	name:Name:tetrahydroxypteridine cycloisomerase activity	name:Synonym:tetrahydroxypteridine lyase (isomerizing)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: tetrahydroxypteridine = H(+) + xanthine-8-carboxylate.
0050559	name:Name:copalyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:(+)-copalyl-diphosphate lyase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:diterpene cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: all-trans-geranylgeranyl diphosphate = (+)-copalyl diphosphate.
0051498	name:Name:syn-copalyl diphosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:diterpene cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: geranylgeranyl diphosphate = 9alpha-copalyl diphosphate.
0043800	name:Name:hexulose-6-phosphate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:HUMPI	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-arabino-3-hexulose 6-phosphate = D-fructose 6-phosphate.
0050335	name:Name:thiocyanate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:benzyl-thiocyanate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:isothiocyanate isomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: benzyl isothiocyanate = benzyl thiocyanate.
0051120	name:Name:hepoxilin A3 synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 12S-5Z,8Z,10E,14Z-12-hydro(pero)xy-eicosa-5,8,10,14-tetraenoic acid = (5Z,9E,14Z)-(8,11R,12S)-11,12-epoxy-8-hydroxyicosa-5,9,14-trienoate. 12S-5Z,8Z,10E,14Z-12-hydro(pero)xy-eicosa-5,8,10,14-tetraenoic acid is also known as 12S-HpETE, and (5Z,9E,14Z)-(8,11R,12S)-11,12-epoxy-8-hydroxyicosa-5,9,14-trienoate as hepoxilin A3.
0070284	name:Name:4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:HMP-P synthase activity	name:Synonym:ThiC	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide + S-adenosylmethionine = 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine phosphate + 5'deoxyadenosine.
0016874	name:Name:ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two substances, or two groups within a single molecule, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0003833	name:Name:beta-alanyl-dopamine synthase activity	name:Synonym:N-beta-alanyl dopamine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:NBAD transferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the synthesis of beta-alanyl-dopamine from the precursor dopamine (3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine).
0008754	name:Name:O antigen ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: Lipid A-core + colanic acid = MLPS.
0016875	name:Name:ligase activity, forming carbon-oxygen bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two molecules via a carbon-oxygen bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0016876	name:Name:ligase activity, forming aminoacyl-tRNA and related compounds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of an amino acid and a nucleic acid (usually tRNA) or poly(ribitol phosphate), with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate. The reaction forms an aminoacyl-tRNA or a related compound.
0016877	name:Name:ligase activity, forming carbon-sulfur bonds	name:Synonym:ligase activity, forming carbon-sulphur bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two molecules via a carbon-sulfur bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0015645	name:Name:fatty acid ligase activity	name:Synonym:acid:CoA ligase (AMP-forming) activity	name:Synonym:acyl coenzyme A synthetase activity	name:Synonym:acyl-coenzyme A ligase activity	name:Synonym:fatty acid CoA ligase activity	name:Synonym:fatty acyl-coenzyme A synthetase activity	name:Synonym:fatty-acid ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the ligation of a fatty acid to an acceptor, coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP.
0016405	name:Name:CoA-ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: substrate + ATP + CoASH = AMP + diphosphate + substrate-CoA.
0016878	name:Name:acid-thiol ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of an acid and a thiol via a carbon-sulfur bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0034797	name:Name:fosfomycin 2-glutathione ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydrogen (2R,3S)-3-methyloxiran-2-ylphosphonic acid + glutathione = hydrogen (1R,2R)-1-glutathio-2-hydroxypropylphosphonic acid.
0034798	name:Name:fosfomycin 2-L-cysteine ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: hydrogen (2R,3S)-3-methyloxiran-2-ylphosphonic acid + L-cysteine = hydrogen (1R,2R)-1- L-cysteine-2-hydroxypropylphosphonic acid.
0016879	name:Name:ligase activity, forming carbon-nitrogen bonds	name:Synonym:other carbon-nitrogen ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two molecules, or two groups within a single molecule, via a carbon-nitrogen bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0003883	name:Name:CTP synthase activity	name:Synonym:CTP synthetase activity	name:Synonym:cytidine 5'-triphosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:cytidine triphosphate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:uridine triphosphate aminase activity	name:Synonym:UTP--ammonia ligase activity	name:Synonym:UTP:ammonia ligase (ADP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + UTP + NH3 = ADP + phosphate + CTP.
0003921	name:Name:GMP synthase activity	name:Synonym:guanylate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:xanthosine 5'-monophosphate aminase activity	name:Synonym:Xanthosine-5'-phosphate--ammonia ligase activity	name:Synonym:xanthosine-5'-phosphate-ammonia ligase activity	name:Synonym:xanthosine-5'-phosphate:ammonia ligase (AMP-forming)	name:Synonym:XMP aminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + xanthosine 5'-phosphate + NH3 = AMP + diphosphate + GMP.
0004019	name:Name:adenylosuccinate synthase activity	name:Synonym:adenylosuccinate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:IMP--aspartate ligase activity	name:Synonym:IMP:L-aspartate ligase (GDP-forming)	name:Synonym:succino-AMP synthetase activity	name:Synonym:succinoadenylic kinosynthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-aspartate + GTP + IMP = N(6)-(1,2-dicarboxyethyl)-AMP + GDP + 3 H(+) + phosphate.
0004055	name:Name:argininosuccinate synthase activity	name:Synonym:arginine succinate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:argininosuccinate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:argininosuccinic acid synthetase activity	name:Synonym:arginosuccinate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:citrulline--aspartate ligase activity	name:Synonym:L-citrulline:L-aspartate ligase (AMP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + L-citrulline + L-aspartate = AMP + diphosphate + (N(omega)-L-arginino)succinate.
0004075	name:Name:biotin carboxylase activity	name:Synonym:biotin carboxylase (component of acetyl CoA carboxylase) activity	name:Synonym:biotin-carboxyl-carrier-protein:carbon-dioxide ligase (ADP-forming) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + biotin-carboxyl-carrier protein + CO2 = ADP + phosphate + carboxybiotin-carboxyl-carrier protein.
0004086	name:Name:carbamoyl-phosphate synthase activity	name:Synonym:carbamoyl phosphate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that results in the formation of carbamoyl phosphate.
0004329	name:Name:formate-tetrahydrofolate ligase activity	name:Synonym:10-formyl-THF synthetase activity	name:Synonym:10-formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:formate:tetrahydrofolate ligase (ADP-forming)	name:Synonym:formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:tetrahydrofolate formylase activity	name:Synonym:tetrahydrofolic formylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + formate + tetrahydrofolate = ADP + phosphate + 10-formyltetrahydrofolate.
0004637	name:Name:phosphoribosylamine-glycine ligase activity	name:Synonym:2-amino-N-ribosylacetamide 5'-phosphate kinosynthase activity	name:Synonym:5'-phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:5-phospho-D-ribosylamine:glycine ligase (ADP-forming)	name:Synonym:GAR	name:Synonym:GAR synthetase activity	name:Synonym:GARS activity	name:Synonym:glycinamide ribonucleotide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:glycineamide ribonucleotide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoribosylglycineamide synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-phospho-D-ribosylamine + ATP + glycine = N(1)-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)glycinamide + ADP + 2 H(+) + phosphate.
0004847	name:Name:urea carboxylase activity	name:Synonym:ATP--urea amidolyase activity	name:Synonym:UALase activity	name:Synonym:UCA activity	name:Synonym:urea amidolyase activity	name:Synonym:urea carboxylase (hydrolysing)	name:Synonym:urea carboxylase (hydrolyzing) activity	name:Synonym:urea:carbon-dioxide ligase (ADP-forming)	name:Synonym:urease (ATP-hydrolysing)	name:Synonym:urease (ATP-hydrolyzing) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + bicarbonate + urea = ADP + 2 H(+) + phosphate + urea-1-carboxylate.
0016880	name:Name:acid-ammonia (or amide) ligase activity	name:Synonym:amide synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the ligation of an acid to ammonia (NH3) or an amide via a carbon-nitrogen bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0016881	name:Name:acid-amino acid ligase activity	name:Synonym:peptide synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the ligation of an acid to an amino acid via a carbon-nitrogen bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0016882	name:Name:cyclo-ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two groups within a single molecule via a carbon-nitrogen bond, forming heterocyclic ring, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0016884	name:Name:carbon-nitrogen ligase activity, with glutamine as amido-N-donor	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of the amide nitrogen of glutamine to a variety of substrates. GATases catalyze two separate reactions at two active sites, which are located either on a single polypeptide chain or on different subunits. In the glutaminase reaction, glutamine is hydrolyzed to glutamate and ammonia, which is added to an acceptor substrate in the synthase reaction.
0016979	name:Name:lipoate-protein ligase activity	name:Synonym:lipoate-protein ligase A activity	name:Synonym:lipoate-protein ligase B activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of carbon-nitrogen bonds between lipoate (5-(1,2-dithiolan-3-yl)pentanoate) and a protein.
0018271	name:Name:biotin-protein ligase activity	name:Synonym:biotin-apoprotein ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + biotin + protein = AMP + diphosphate + biotin-protein.
0019776	name:Name:Atg8 ligase activity	name:Synonym:APG8 conjugating enzyme activity	name:Synonym:APG8 ligase activity	name:Synonym:Atg8 conjugating enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the covalent attachment of the ubiquitin-like protein Atg8 to substrate molecules; phosphatidylethanolamine is a known substrate.
0032267	name:Name:tRNA(Ile)-lysidine synthase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA(Ile)-2-lysyl-cytidine synthase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA(Ile)-lysidine synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the ligation of lysine onto the cytidine residue present at the wobble position (usually position 34) of an AUA-specific isoleucine tRNA, to form the derivative lysidine. This modification converts both the codon specificity of tRNA(Ile) from AUG to AUA and its amino acid specificity from methionine to isoleucine.
0034028	name:Name:5-(carboxyamino)imidazole ribonucleotide synthase activity	name:Synonym:5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole:carbon-dioxide ligase (ADP-forming) activity	name:Synonym:N5-CAIR synthetase activity	name:Synonym:N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:PurK	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole + ATP + bicarbonate = 5-carboxyamino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole + ADP + 3 H(+) + phosphate.
0047483	name:Name:imidazoleacetate-phosphoribosyldiphosphate ligase activity	name:Synonym:5-phosphoribosylimidazoleacetate synthetase activity	name:Synonym:imidazoleacetate:5-phosphoribosyl-diphosphate ligase (ADP- and diphosphate-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-diphosphate + ATP + H(2)O + imidazol-4-ylacetate = 1-(5-phosphoribosyl)imidazol-4-ylacetate + ADP + diphosphate + 2 H(+) + phosphate.
0047897	name:Name:formate-dihydrofolate ligase activity	name:Synonym:dihydrofolate formyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:formate:dihydrofolate ligase (ADP-forming)	name:Synonym:formyl dihydrofolate synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 7,8-dihydrofolate + ATP + formate = 10-formyldihydrofolate + ADP + H(+) + phosphate.
0047943	name:Name:glutamate-methylamine ligase activity	name:Synonym:gamma-glutamylmethylamide synthetase activity	name:Synonym:L-glutamate:methylamine ligase (ADP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-glutamate + ATP + methylammonium = N(5)-methyl-L-glutamine + ADP + 2 H(+) + phosphate.
0050260	name:Name:ribose-5-phosphate-ammonia ligase activity	name:Synonym:5-phosphoribosylamine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:ammonia-ribose 5-phosphate aminotransferase activity	name:Synonym:ribose 5-phosphate aminotransferase activity	name:Synonym:ribose-5-phosphate:ammonia ligase (ADP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-ribose 5-phosphate + ATP + NH(4)(+) = 5-phospho-D-ribosylamine + ADP + 2 H(+) + phosphate.
0072590	name:Name:N-acetyl-L-aspartate-L-glutamate ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + N-acetyl-L-aspartate + L-glutamate = ADP + phosphate + N-acetylaspartyl-glutamate.
0072591	name:Name:citrate-L-glutamate ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + citrate + L-glutamate = ADP + phosphate + beta-citryl-L-glutamate.
0016885	name:Name:ligase activity, forming carbon-carbon bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two molecules via a carbon-carbon bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0004736	name:Name:pyruvate carboxylase activity	name:Synonym:pyruvate:carbon-dioxide ligase (ADP-forming)	name:Synonym:pyruvic carboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + bicarbonate + pyruvate = ADP + 2 H(+) + oxaloacetate + phosphate.
0016421	name:Name:CoA carboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of a carboxyl group to a molecule that is attached to CoA, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0018524	name:Name:acetophenone carboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: acetophenone + CO2 = H+ + benzoyl acetate.
0018710	name:Name:acetone carboxylase activity	name:Synonym:acetone:carbon-dioxide ligase (AMP-forming)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: acetone + ATP + CO(2) + 2 H(2)O = acetoacetate + AMP + 4 H(+) + 2 phosphate.
0018862	name:Name:phenylphosphate carboxylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: phenylphosphate + CO2 + H2O = H+ + phosphate + 4-hydroxybenzoate.
0034029	name:Name:2-oxoglutarate carboxylase activity	name:Synonym:carboxylating factor for ICDH	name:Synonym:CFI	name:Synonym:OGC	name:Synonym:oxalosuccinate synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-oxoglutarate + ATP + bicarbonate = ADP + 2 H(+) + oxalosuccinate + phosphate.
0016886	name:Name:ligase activity, forming phosphoric ester bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of two molecules, or two groups within a single molecule, via a phosphoric ester bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0003909	name:Name:DNA ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of a phosphodiester bond between the 3'-hydroxyl group at the end of one DNA chain and the 5'-phosphate group at the end of another. This reaction requires an energy source such as ATP or NAD+.
0008452	name:Name:RNA ligase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of a phosphodiester bond between a hydroxyl group at the end of one RNA chain and the 5'-phosphate group at the end of another.
0045438	name:Name:delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine synthetase activity	name:Synonym:ACV synthetase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the formation of delta-(L-alpha-aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine from constituent amino acids and ATP in the presence of magnesium ions and dithioerythritol.
0051002	name:Name:ligase activity, forming nitrogen-metal bonds	info:Definition:Catalysis of the joining of a metal ion to a molecule via a nitrogen-metal bond, with the concomitant hydrolysis of the diphosphate bond in ATP or a similar triphosphate.
0051003	name:Name:ligase activity, forming nitrogen-metal bonds, forming coordination complexes	info:Definition:Catalysis of the ligation of two substances via a nitrogen-metal bond, forming a coordination complex.
0019172	name:Name:glyoxalase III activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: methylglyoxal + H2O = D-lactate.
0019239	name:Name:deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of an amino group from a substrate, producing ammonia (NH3).
0000034	name:Name:adenine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:ADase activity	name:Synonym:adenase activity	name:Synonym:adenine aminase activity	name:Synonym:adenine aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: adenine + H2O = hypoxanthine + NH3.
0003876	name:Name:AMP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:5-adenylate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:5-adenylic acid deaminase activity	name:Synonym:5-AMP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine 5-monophosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine 5-phosphate aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine monophosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenyl deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenylate aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:adenylate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenylate deaminase reaction	name:Synonym:adenylate desaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenylic acid deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenylic deaminase activity	name:Synonym:AMP aminase activity	name:Synonym:AMP aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:myoadenylate deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: AMP + H2O = IMP + NH3.
0004000	name:Name:adenosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine deaminase reaction	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: adenosine + H2O = inosine + NH3.
0003726	name:Name:double-stranded RNA adenosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:double-stranded RNA specific editase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: adenosine + H2O = inosine + NH3, in a double-stranded RNA molecule.
0008251	name:Name:tRNA-specific adenosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:tRNA-adenosine deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: adenosine + H2O = inosine + NH3, in a tRNA molecule.
0004126	name:Name:cytidine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:cytidine aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:cytosine nucleoside deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cytidine + H2O = uridine + NH3.
0004131	name:Name:cytosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:cytosine aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:isocytosine deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: cytosine + H2O = uracil + NH3.
0004132	name:Name:dCMP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:dCMP aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:deoxy-CMP-deaminase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidine monophosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidine-5'-monophosphate aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidine-5'-phosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidylate aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidylate deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dCMP + H2O = dUMP + NH3.
0004153	name:Name:dihydropterin deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 7,8-dihydropterin + H2O = 7,8-dihydrolumazine + NH3.
0004342	name:Name:glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucose-6-phosphate aminohydrolase (ketol isomerizing)	name:Synonym:aminodeoxyglucosephosphate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:GlcN6P deaminase activity	name:Synonym:glucosamine phosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:glucosamine-6-phosphate isomerase activity	name:Synonym:glucosaminephosphate isomerase	name:Synonym:phosphoglucosamine isomerase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoglucosaminisomerase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: D-glucosamine 6-phosphate + H(2)O = beta-D-fructose 6-phosphate + NH(4)(+).
0008473	name:Name:ornithine cyclodeaminase activity	name:Synonym:L-ornithine ammonia-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:L-ornithine ammonia-lyase (cyclizing; L-proline-forming)	name:Synonym:OCD activity	name:Synonym:ornithine cyclase (deaminating) activity	name:Synonym:ornithine cyclase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-ornithine = L-proline + NH(4)(+).
0008829	name:Name:dCTP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:5-methyl-dCTP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:dCTP aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidine triphosphate deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dCTP + H2O = dUTP + NH3.
0008835	name:Name:diaminohydroxyphosphoribosylaminopyrimidine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2,5-diamino-6-(ribosylamino)-4(3H)-pyrimidinone 5'-phosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2,5-diamino-6-hydroxy-4-(5-phosphoribosylamino)-pyrimidine 2-aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:2,5-diamino-6-hydroxy-4-(5-phosphoribosylamino)pyrimidine 2-aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2,5-diamino-6-hydroxy-4-(5-phosphoribosylamino)-pyrimidine + H(2)O + H(+) = 5-amino-6-(5-phosphoribosylamino)uracil + NH(4)(+).
0008892	name:Name:guanine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:GAH activity	name:Synonym:guanase activity	name:Synonym:guanine aminase activity	name:Synonym:guanine aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: guanine + H2O = xanthine + NH3.
0030412	name:Name:formimidoyltetrahydrofolate cyclodeaminase activity	name:Synonym:5-formimidoyltetrahydrofolate ammonia-lyase (cyclizing)	name:Synonym:5-formimidoyltetrahydrofolate ammonia-lyase (cyclizing; 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate-forming)	name:Synonym:formiminotetrahydrofolate cyclodeaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5-formimidoyltetrahydrofolate + 2 H(+) = 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate + NH(4)(+).
0033973	name:Name:dCTP deaminase (dUMP-forming) activity	name:Synonym:dCTP aminohydrolase (dUMP-forming) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dCTP + 2 H(2)O = diphosphate + dUMP + H(+) + NH(4)(+).
0035888	name:Name:isoguanine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2-hydroxyadenine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2-oxoadenine deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: isoguanine + H2O = xanthine + NH3.
0046936	name:Name:deoxyadenosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:deoxyadenosine deaminase reaction	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: deoxyadenosine + H2O = deoxyinosine + NH3.
0047424	name:Name:methylenediurea deaminase activity	name:Synonym:methylenediurea aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:methylenediurease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 H2O + methylenediurea = CO2 + 2 NH3 + N-hydroxymethylurea.
0047425	name:Name:1-pyrroline-4-hydroxy-2-carboxylate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:1-pyrroline-4-hydroxy-2-carboxylate aminohydrolase (decyclizing)	name:Synonym:HPC deaminase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 4-hydroxy-1-pyrroline-2-carboxylate + H(2)O + H(+) = 2,5-dioxopentanoate + NH(4)(+).
0047623	name:Name:adenosine-phosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenine nucleotide deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine (phosphate) deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine-phosphate aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 5'-AMP + H2O = 5'-IMP + NH3.
0047629	name:Name:ADP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine diphosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosinepyrophosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:ADP aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ADP + H2O = IDP + NH3.
0047692	name:Name:ATP deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosine triphosphate deaminase activity	name:Synonym:ATP aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O = ITP + NH3.
0047711	name:Name:blasticidin-S deaminase activity	name:Synonym:blasticidin-S aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: blasticidin S + H2O = deaminohydroxyblasticidin S + NH3.
0047790	name:Name:creatinine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:creatinine desiminase activity	name:Synonym:creatinine hydrolase	name:Synonym:creatinine iminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: creatinine + H2O = N-methylhydantoin + NH3.
0047844	name:Name:deoxycytidine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:deoxycytidine aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: deoxycytidine + H2O = deoxyuridine + NH3.
0047974	name:Name:guanosine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:guanosine aminase activity	name:Synonym:guanosine aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: guanosine + H2O = xanthosine + NH3.
0050228	name:Name:pterin deaminase activity	name:Synonym:2-amino-4-hydroxypteridine aminohydrolase activity	name:Synonym:acrasinase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2-amino-4-hydroxypteridine + H2O = 2,4-dihydroxypteridine + NH3.
0050239	name:Name:pyrithiamine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:1-(4-amino-2-methylpyrimid-5-ylmethyl)-3-(beta-hydroxyethyl)-2-methylpyridinium-bromide aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 1-(4-amino-2-methylpyrimid-5-ylmethyl)-3-(beta-hydroxyethyl)-2-methylpyridinium bromide + H2O = 1-(4-hydroxy-2-methylpyrimid-5-ylmethyl)-3-(beta-hydroxyethyl)-2-methylpyridinium bromide + NH3.
0050270	name:Name:S-adenosylhomocysteine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:adenosylhomocysteine deaminase activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine + H(2)O + H(+) = S-inosyl-L-homocysteine + NH(4)(+).
0050279	name:Name:sepiapterin deaminase activity	name:Synonym:sepiapterin aminohydrolase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: sepiapterin + H2O = xanthopterin-B2 + NH3.
0030366	name:Name:Mo-molybdopterin synthase activity	name:Synonym:molybdopterin synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the conversion of precursor Z to molybdopterin, the final step in molybdopterin biosynthesis.
0032451	name:Name:demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from a substrate.
0004162	name:Name:dimethylnitrosamine demethylase activity	name:Synonym:N-nitrosodimethylamine demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from N-nitrosodimethylamine.
0008398	name:Name:sterol 14-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 51 activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 CYP51	name:Synonym:lanosterol 14-alpha-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:lanosterol 14-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:obtusufoliol 14-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:sterol 14-alpha-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:sterol 14alpha-demethylase activity	name:Synonym:sterol,NADPH:oxygen oxidoreductase (14-methyl cleaving)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: obtusifoliol + 3 O2 + 3 NADPH + 3 H+ = 4-alpha-methyl-5-alpha-ergosta-8,14,24(28)-trien-3-beta-ol + formate + 3 NADP+ + 3 H2O.
0018487	name:Name:vanillate O-demethylase (anaerobic) activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: vanillate + Co+ = Co3+-CH3 + 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate.
0018489	name:Name:vanillate monooxygenase activity	name:Synonym:4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzoate demethylase activity	name:Synonym:vanillate demethylase (aerobic) activity	name:Synonym:vanillate demethylase activity	name:Synonym:vanillate:oxygen oxidoreductase (demethylating)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: H(+) + NADH + O(2) + vanillate = 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate + formaldehyde + H(2)O + NAD(+).
0032452	name:Name:histone demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from a histone.
0032453	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H3-K4 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from lysine at position 4 of the histone H3 protein.
0032454	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H3-K9 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: histone H3 N6-methyl-L-lysine (position 9) + alpha-ketoglutarate + O2 = succinate + CO2 + formaldehyde + lysine. This reaction is the removal of a methyl group from lysine at position 9 of the histone H3 protein.
0033746	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H3-R2 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from arginine at position 2 of the histone H3 protein.
0033749	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H4-R3 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from arginine at position 3 of the histone H4 protein.
0035575	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H4-K20 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: histone H4 N6-methyl-L-lysine (position 20) + 2-oxoglutarate + O2 = histone H4 L-lysine (position 20) + succinate + formaldehyde + CO2. This reaction is the removal of a methyl group from lysine at position 20 of the histone H4 protein.
0051864	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H3-K36 specific)	name:Synonym:[histone-H3]-lysine-36 demethylase activity	name:Synonym:H3-K36-specific demethylase activity	name:Synonym:histone H3-lysine-36 demethylase activity	name:Synonym:histone-lysine (H3-K36) demethylase activity	name:Synonym:histone-lysine demethylase activity (H3-K36 specific)	name:Synonym:histone-lysine(H3-K36) demethylase activity	name:Synonym:JHDM1A activity	name:Synonym:JmjC domain-containing histone demethylase 1A activity	name:Synonym:protein-6-N,6-N-dimethyl-L-lysine,2-oxoglutarate:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:protein-N6,N6-dimethyl-L-lysine,2-oxoglutarate:oxygen oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: histone H3 N6-methyl-L-lysine (position 36) + alpha-ketoglutarate + O2 = succinate + CO2 + formaldehyde + lysine. This reaction is the removal of a methyl group from lysine at position 36 of the histone H3 protein.
0071558	name:Name:histone demethylase activity (H3-K27 specific)	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from lysine at position 27 of the histone H3 protein.
0035514	name:Name:DNA demethylase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the removal of a methyl group from one or more nucleosides within a DNA molecule.
0043336	name:Name:site-specific telomere resolvase activity	name:Synonym:ResT	name:Synonym:TelN	info:Definition:Catalysis of a site-specific breakage and reunion reaction that generates two hairpin telomeres from a replicated telomere substrate. Occurs via a two-step transesterification with a protein-DNA intermediate similar to that used by topoisomerases and site-specific recombinases.
0043364	name:Name:catalysis of free radical formation	name:Synonym:catalysis of free radical generation	name:Synonym:catalysis of free-radical biosynthesis	name:Synonym:catalysis of free-radical formation	name:Synonym:catalysis of free-radical generation	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction that generates a free radical, a highly reactive molecule with an unsatisfied electron valence pair.
0046572	name:Name:versicolorin B synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: versiconal = versicolorin B + H2O.
0046905	name:Name:phytoene synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: prephytoene pyrophosphate = phytoene + diphosphate.
0070283	name:Name:radical SAM enzyme activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of a reaction in which S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) undergoes reductive cleavage to serve as a source of the 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical.
0004076	name:Name:biotin synthase activity	name:Synonym:biotin synthetase activity	name:Synonym:dethiobiotin:sulfur sulfurtransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 S-adenosyl-L-methionine + dethiobiotin + S(2-) = 2 5'-deoxyadenosine + 2 L-methionine + biotin + H(+).
0016992	name:Name:lipoate synthase activity	name:Synonym:LipA	name:Synonym:lipoic acid synthase	name:Synonym:lipoyl synthase activity	name:Synonym:LS	name:Synonym:protein 6-N-(octanoyl)lysine:sulfur sulfurtransferase activity	name:Synonym:protein N6-(octanoyl)lysine:sulfur sulfurtransferase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: protein N6-(octanoyl)lysine + 2 sulfur + 2 S-adenosyl-L-methionine = protein N6-(lipoyl)lysine + 2 L-methionine + 2 5'-deoxyadenosyl.
0046405	name:Name:glycerol dehydratase activity	name:Synonym:glycerol dehydrase activity	name:Synonym:glycerol hydro-lyase (3-hydroxypropanal-forming)	name:Synonym:glycerol hydro-lyase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: glycerol = 3-hydroxypropanal + H2O.
0050066	name:Name:lysine 2,3-aminomutase activity	name:Synonym:L-lysine 2,3-aminomutase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: L-lysine = (3S)-3,6-diaminohexanoate.
0070497	name:Name:6-carboxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin synthase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate + H2O = 6-carboxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin + acetaldehyde + PPPi.
0004872	name:Name:receptor activity	name:Synonym:receptor guanylate cyclase activity	name:Synonym:viral antireceptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell activity.
0001618	name:Name:viral receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a virus component and mediating entry of the virus into the cell.
0005040	name:Name:decoy death receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular messenger (death ligand) without transmission of the signal. Decoy death receptors compete with death receptors for ligand binding, and do not initiate apoptosis.
0005055	name:Name:laminin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a laminin, a glycoprotein that constitutes the majority of proteins in the basement membrane, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008329	name:Name:pattern recognition receptor activity	name:Synonym:macrophage receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a molecular pattern based on a repeating or polymeric structure, such as a polysaccharide or peptidoglycan, to initiate a change in cell activity. Such molecular patterns are sometimes associated with potential pathogens.
0001873	name:Name:polysaccharide receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a polysaccharide to initiate a change in cell activity.
0001874	name:Name:1,3-beta-D-glucan receptor activity	name:Synonym:(1->3)-beta-D-glucan receptor	name:Synonym:zymosan receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with 1,3-beta-D glucans to initiate a change in cell activity.
0001875	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide receptor activity	name:Synonym:endotoxin receptor activity	name:Synonym:LPS receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a lipopolysaccharide to initiate a change in cell activity. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are major components of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, making them prime targets for recognition by the immune system.
0001877	name:Name:lipoarabinomannan receptor activity	name:Synonym:LAM receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with lipoarabinomannan to initiate a change in cell activity.
0016019	name:Name:peptidoglycan receptor activity	name:Synonym:peptidoglycan recognition activity	info:Definition:Combining with a peptidoglycan to initiate a change in cell activity.
0070892	name:Name:lipoteichoic acid receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with lipoteichoic acid to initiate a change in cell activity.
0030226	name:Name:apolipoprotein receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an apolipoprotein to initiate a change in cell activity.
0034188	name:Name:apolipoprotein A-I receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with apolipoprotein A-I and transmitting the signal to initiate a change in cell activity.
0038023	name:Name:signaling receptor activity	name:Synonym:receptor activity involved in signal transduction	info:Definition:Receiving an extracellular or intracellular signal and transmitting the signal to initiate a change in cell activity. A signal is a physical entity or change in state that is used to transfer information in order to trigger a response.
0001565	name:Name:phorbol ester receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a phorbol ester to initiate a change in cell activity.
0001566	name:Name:non-kinase phorbol ester receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a phorbol ester and transmitting the signal by a mechanism independent of kinase activity.
0001653	name:Name:peptide receptor activity	name:Synonym:endogenous peptide receptor activity	name:Synonym:exogenous peptide receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular or intracellular peptide to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008528	name:Name:peptide receptor activity, G-protein coupled	name:Synonym:G protein coupled peptide receptor activity	name:Synonym:G-protein coupled peptide receptor activity	name:Synonym:G-protein-coupled peptide receptor activity	name:Synonym:peptide receptor activity, G protein coupled	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular or intracellular peptide to initiate a G-protein mediated change in cell activity. A G-protein is a signal transduction molecule that alternates between an inactive GDP-bound and an active GTP-bound state.
0016941	name:Name:natriuretic peptide receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a natriuretic peptide to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004874	name:Name:aryl hydrocarbon receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an aryl hydrocarbon to initiate a change in cell activity. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a ligand-activated transcription factor which translocates to the nucleus to activate transcription upon ligand-binding.
0004879	name:Name:ligand-dependent nuclear receptor activity	name:Synonym:nuclear hormone receptor	info:Definition:A ligand-dependent receptor found in the nucleus of the cell.
0003707	name:Name:steroid hormone receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a steroid hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0003708	name:Name:retinoic acid receptor activity	name:Synonym:vitamin A receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with retinoic acid to initiate a change in cell activity. Retinoic acid is one of the forms of vitamin A.
0004880	name:Name:juvenile hormone receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with juvenile hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004887	name:Name:thyroid hormone receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with thyroid hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008434	name:Name:vitamin D3 receptor activity	name:Synonym:cholecaliferol receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with vitamin D3, cholecalciferol, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004888	name:Name:transmembrane signaling receptor activity	name:Synonym:non G protein coupled 7TM receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-G-protein coupled 7TM receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-G-protein-coupled 7TM receptor activity	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular or intracellular signal and transmitting the signal from one side of the membrane to the other to initiate a change in cell activity.
0001571	name:Name:non-tyrosine kinase fibroblast growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-tyrosine kinase FGF receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-tyrosine kinase FGFR activity	info:Definition:Combining with fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and transmitting the signal by a mechanism independent of tyrosine kinase activity.
0001847	name:Name:opsonin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an opsonin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004875	name:Name:complement receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with any component or product of the complement cascade to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004896	name:Name:cytokine receptor activity	name:Synonym:hematopoietin/interferon-class (D200-domain) cytokine receptor activity	name:Synonym:IL receptor	name:Synonym:interleukin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a cytokine to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004930	name:Name:G-protein coupled receptor activity	name:Synonym:EBV-induced receptor	name:Synonym:Epstein-Barr Virus-induced receptor activity	name:Synonym:G protein coupled receptor activity	name:Synonym:G protein linked receptor activity	name:Synonym:G-protein coupled receptor activity, unknown ligand	name:Synonym:G-protein linked receptor activity	name:Synonym:G-protein-coupled receptor activity	name:Synonym:GPCR activity	name:Synonym:ligand-dependent GPCR activity	name:Synonym:Mas proto-oncogene receptor activity	name:Synonym:orphan G protein coupled receptor activity	name:Synonym:orphan G-protein coupled receptor activity	name:Synonym:orphan GPCR activity	name:Synonym:RDC1 receptor activity	name:Synonym:SREB receptor	name:Synonym:super conserved receptor expressed in brain receptor activity	info:Definition:A receptor that binds an extracellular ligand and transmits the signal to a heterotrimeric G-protein complex. These receptors are characteristically seven-transmembrane receptors and are made up of hetero- or homodimers.
0004984	name:Name:olfactory receptor activity	name:Synonym:odorant receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an odorant and transmitting the signal from one side of the membrane to the other to initiate a change in cell activity in response to detection of smell.
0005034	name:Name:osmosensor activity	info:Definition:Sensing extracellular osmolarity to initiate a change in cell activity, and spanning the membrane of the cell.
0005035	name:Name:death receptor activity	name:Synonym:apoptosis-activating receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular messenger (called a death ligand), and transmitting the signal from one side of the plasma membrane to the other to initiate apoptosis.
0005042	name:Name:netrin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a netrin signal and transmitting the signal from one side of the membrane to the other to initiate a change in cell activity.
0005056	name:Name:tiggrin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with the extracellular matrix ligand tiggrin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008046	name:Name:axon guidance receptor activity	name:Synonym:receptor activity involved in axon guidance	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular messenger that results in a change in cellular activity involved in axon guidance.
0008066	name:Name:glutamate receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with glutamate to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008158	name:Name:hedgehog receptor activity	name:Synonym:patched activity	info:Definition:Combining with the hedgehog protein to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008281	name:Name:sulfonylurea receptor activity	name:Synonym:sulphonylurea receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with sulfonylurea to initiate a change in cell activity.
0009884	name:Name:cytokinin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a cytokinin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0015464	name:Name:acetylcholine receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with acetylcholine to initiate a change in cell activity.
0016502	name:Name:nucleotide receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a nucleotide to initiate a change in cell activity. A nucleotide is a compound that consists of a nucleoside esterified with a phosphate molecule.
0016524	name:Name:latrotoxin receptor activity	name:Synonym:latrophilin	info:Definition:Combining with alpha-latrotoxin, a potent presynaptic neurotoxin, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0016917	name:Name:GABA receptor activity	name:Synonym:4-aminobutanoate receptor activity	name:Synonym:4-aminobutyrate receptor activity	name:Synonym:GABA binding	name:Synonym:gamma-aminobutyrate binding	name:Synonym:gamma-aminobutyric acid binding	name:Synonym:gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate), an amino acid which acts as a neurotransmitter in some organisms, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0017154	name:Name:semaphorin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a semaphorin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0019198	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein phosphatase activity	info:Definition:Combining with a signal and transmitting the signal from one side of the membrane to the other to initiate a change in cell activity by catalysis of the reaction: a phosphoprotein + H2O = a protein + phosphate.
0019199	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity	info:Definition:Combining with a signal and transmitting the signal from one side of the membrane to the other to initiate a change in cell activity by catalysis of the reaction: a protein + ATP = a phosphoprotein + ADP.
0019763	name:Name:immunoglobulin receptor activity	name:Synonym:FC receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with the Fc region of an immunoglobulin protein to initiate a change in cell activity.
0030369	name:Name:ICAM-3 receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with ICAM-3, intercellular adhesion molecule 3, to initiate a change in cell activity. ICAM-3, or CD50, are constitutively expressed on monocytes, granulocytes and lymphocytes; on physiological stimulation, they become transiently phosphorylated on serine residues.
0030379	name:Name:neurotensin receptor activity, non-G-protein coupled	name:Synonym:neurotensin receptor activity, non G protein coupled	name:Synonym:non G protein coupled neurotensin receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-G-protein coupled neurotensin receptor activity	name:Synonym:non-G-protein-coupled neurotensin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with neurotensin, a neuropeptide active in the central and peripheral nervous system in mammals, to initiate a change in cell activity by a mechanism independent of coupling to G proteins.
0032393	name:Name:MHC class I receptor activity	name:Synonym:alpha-beta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:gamma-delta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:T cell receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an MHC class I protein complex to initiate a change in cellular activity. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
0032394	name:Name:MHC class Ib receptor activity	name:Synonym:alpha-beta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:gamma-delta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:T cell receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an MHC class Ib protein complex to initiate a change in cellular activity. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 or HLA-E gene families.
0032395	name:Name:MHC class II receptor activity	name:Synonym:alpha-beta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:gamma-delta T cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:T cell receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with an MHC class II protein complex to initiate a change in cellular activity.
0035586	name:Name:purinergic receptor activity	name:Synonym:purinoceptor	name:Synonym:purinoreceptor	info:Definition:Combining with a purine or purine derivative (purine nucleoside or purine nucleotide) to initiate a change in cell activity.
0038025	name:Name:reelin receptor activity	name:Synonym:reeler receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with the secreted glycoprotein reelin, and transmitting the signal to initiate a change in cell activity.
0042813	name:Name:Wnt receptor activity	name:Synonym:frizzled receptor activity	name:Synonym:frizzled-2 receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a member of the Wnt family of signaling molecules to initiate a change in cell activity.
0045233	name:Name:natural killer cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:Ly49i	name:Synonym:NK cell receptor activity	info:Definition:A receptor found on the surface of natural killer cells which binds Class I MHC antigens and is required for activation of NK activity. It belongs to the Ly49i family.
0005030	name:Name:neurotrophin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with neurotrophin, any of a family of growth factors that block apoptosis in neurons and thus promote nerve growth, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0010465	name:Name:nerve growth factor receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with nerve growth factor, to block apoptosis in neurons and promote nerve growth, or to initiate a change in cell activity.
0060175	name:Name:brain-derived neurotrophic factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:BDNF receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with brain-derived neurotrophic factor, to block apoptosis in neurons and promote nerve growth, or to initiate a change in cell activity.
0005220	name:Name:inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-sensitive calcium-release channel activity	name:Synonym:inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor activity	name:Synonym:InsP3 receptor	name:Synonym:IP3 receptor activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transmembrane transfer of a calcium ion by a channel that opens when inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) has been bound by the channel complex or one of its constituent parts.
0008036	name:Name:diuretic hormone receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a diuretic hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0009881	name:Name:photoreceptor activity	name:Synonym:blue-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:green-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:long-wave-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:opsin	name:Synonym:red-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:short-wave-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:UV-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:violet-sensitive opsin	info:Definition:The function of absorbing and responding to incidental electromagnetic radiation, particularly visible light. The response may involve a change in conformation.
0008020	name:Name:G-protein coupled photoreceptor activity	name:Synonym:G protein coupled photoreceptor activity	name:Synonym:G-protein-coupled photoreceptor activity	info:Definition:A G-protein coupled receptor that responds to incidental electromagnetic radiation, particularly visible light.
0009882	name:Name:blue light photoreceptor activity	info:Definition:The function of absorbing and responding to electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of approximately 400-470nm. The response may involve a change in conformation.
0009883	name:Name:red or far-red light photoreceptor activity	name:Synonym:red/far-red light photoreceptor activity	info:Definition:The function of absorbing and responding to electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of approximately 660-730nm. The response may involve a change in conformation.
0015026	name:Name:coreceptor activity	name:Synonym:coreceptor, insoluble ligand activity	name:Synonym:coreceptor, soluble ligand activity	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular or intracellular messenger, and in cooperation with a nearby primary receptor, initiating a change in cell activity.
0060724	name:Name:coreceptor activity involved in epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway	name:Synonym:coreceptor activity involved in epidermal growth factor receptor signalling pathway	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular messenger, and in cooperation with a primary EGF receptor, initiating a change in cell activity through the EGF receptor signaling pathway.
0071936	name:Name:coreceptor activity involved in Wnt receptor signaling pathway	name:Synonym:coreceptor activity involved in Wnt receptor signalling pathway	info:Definition:Combining with an extracellular messenger, and in cooperation with a primary Wnt receptor, initiating a change in cell activity through the Wnt receptor signaling pathway.
0030373	name:Name:high molecular weight B cell growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:high molecular weight B lymphocyte growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:high molecular weight B-cell growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:high molecular weight B-lymphocyte growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:HMW-BCGF receptor	info:Definition:Combining with a high molecular weight B cell growth factor to initiate a change in cell activity.
0030377	name:Name:U-plasminogen activator receptor activity	name:Synonym:uPAR	name:Synonym:urokinase plasminogen activator receptor	info:Definition:Combining with the urokinase plasminogen activator to initiate a change in cell activity.
0030594	name:Name:neurotransmitter receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a neurotransmitter to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004952	name:Name:dopamine receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with the neurotransmitter dopamine to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008188	name:Name:neuropeptide receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a neuropeptide to initiate a change in cell activity.
0008503	name:Name:benzodiazepine receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with benzodiazepines, a class of drugs with hypnotic, anxiolytic, anticonvulsive, amnestic and myorelaxant properties, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0042071	name:Name:leucokinin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a leucokinin, any of several octapeptide hormones found in insects, to initiate a change in cell activity.
0043404	name:Name:corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotropin-releasing hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:corticotropin-releasing factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:CRF receptor activity	name:Synonym:CRH receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with corticotropin-releasing hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0050785	name:Name:advanced glycation end-product receptor activity	name:Synonym:AGE receptor activity	name:Synonym:RAGE activity	info:Definition:Combining with advanced glycation end-products to initiate a change in cell activity. Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) form from a series of chemical reactions after an initial glycation event (a non-enzymatic reaction between reducing sugars and free amino groups of proteins).
0070053	name:Name:thrombospondin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with thrombospondin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0038024	name:Name:cargo receptor activity	name:Synonym:endocytic receptor activity	name:Synonym:receptor activity involved in ligand uptake	name:Synonym:receptor activity involved in receptor-mediated endocytosis	name:Synonym:transport receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining selectively with an extracellular macromolecule and delivering the macromolecule into the cell via endocytosis.
0004873	name:Name:asialoglycoprotein receptor activity	info:Definition:Receiving an asialoglycoprotein, and delivering the asialoglycoprotein into the cell via endocytosis. An asialoglycoprotein is a plasma glycoproteins from which the terminal sialic acid residue on their complex carbohydrate groups has been removed. The asialoglycoprotein receptor recognizes the terminal galactose and N-acetylgalactosamine units of the asialoglycoprotein, the receptor-ligand complex is internalized and transported to a sorting organelle where disassociation occurs before the receptor is recycled to the cell membrane.
0004998	name:Name:transferrin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining selectively with transferrin, and delivering transferrin into the cell via endocytosis. Transferrin is a major iron carrier protein in vertebrates.
0005044	name:Name:scavenger receptor activity	name:Synonym:macrophage receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with any modified low-density lipoprotein (LDL) or other polyanionic ligand and delivering the ligand into the cell via endocytosis. Ligands include acetylated and oxidized LDL, Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, apoptotic cells, beta-amyloid fibrils, and advanced glycation end products (AGEs).
0008196	name:Name:vitellogenin receptor activity	info:Definition:Receiving vitellogenin, and delivering vitellogenin into the cell via endocytosis.
0016964	name:Name:alpha-2 macroglobulin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with alpha-2 macroglobulin and delivering alpha-2 macroglobulin into the cell via receptor-mediated endocytosis.
0030228	name:Name:lipoprotein particle receptor activity	name:Synonym:lipoprotein receptor activity	name:Synonym:plasma lipoprotein particle receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a lipoprotein particle and delivering the lipoprotein particle into the cell via endocytosis. A lipoprotein particle, also known as a lipoprotein, is a clathrate complex consisting of a lipid enwrapped in a protein host without covalent binding in such a way that the complex has a hydrophilic outer surface consisting of all the protein and the polar ends of any phospholipids.
0005041	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein receptor activity	name:Synonym:LDL receptor	name:Synonym:low-density lipoprotein receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a low-density lipoprotein particle and delivering the low-density lipoprotein into the cell via endocytosis.
0030229	name:Name:very-low-density lipoprotein particle receptor activity	name:Synonym:apolipoprotein E receptor activity	name:Synonym:very-low-density lipoprotein receptor activity	name:Synonym:VLDL receptor	info:Definition:Combining with a very-low-density lipoprotein particle and delivering the very-low-density lipoprotein into the cell via endocytosis.
0070506	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle receptor activity	name:Synonym:HDL receptor	name:Synonym:high-density lipoprotein receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with a high-density lipoprotein particle and delivering the high-density lipoprotein into the cell via endocytosis.
0033568	name:Name:lactoferrin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with lactoferrin and delivering lactoferrin into the cell via endocytosis. Lactoferrin is an iron-binding glycoprotein which binds ferric iron most efficiently at low pH.
0070287	name:Name:ferritin receptor activity	name:Synonym:ferritin complex receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with ferritin, and delivering ferritin into the cell via endocytosis.
0005198	name:Name:structural molecule activity	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a complex or assembly within or outside a cell.
0003735	name:Name:structural constituent of ribosome	name:Synonym:ribosomal protein	name:Synonym:ribosomal RNA	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the ribosome.
0005199	name:Name:structural constituent of cell wall	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a cell wall.
0005200	name:Name:structural constituent of cytoskeleton	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a cytoskeletal structure.
0005201	name:Name:extracellular matrix structural constituent	name:Synonym:extracellular matrix glycoprotein	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the extracellular matrix.
0030020	name:Name:extracellular matrix structural constituent conferring tensile strength	info:Definition:A constituent of the extracellular matrix that enables the matrix to resist longitudinal stress.
0030021	name:Name:extracellular matrix structural constituent conferring compression resistance	info:Definition:A constituent of the extracellular matrix that enables the matrix to resist compressive forces; often a proteoglycan.
0030345	name:Name:structural constituent of tooth enamel	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of tooth enamel.
0030023	name:Name:extracellular matrix constituent conferring elasticity	name:Synonym:elastin	info:Definition:A component of the extracellular matrix that enables the matrix to recoil after transient stretching.
0030197	name:Name:extracellular matrix constituent, lubricant activity	info:Definition:Functions as a lubricant for an extracellular matrix, such as a mucous membrane.
0005212	name:Name:structural constituent of eye lens	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the lens of an eye.
0005213	name:Name:structural constituent of chorion	name:Synonym:structural protein of chorion	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a chorion. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0008147	name:Name:structural constituent of bone	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of bone.
0008307	name:Name:structural constituent of muscle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a muscle fiber.
0016490	name:Name:structural constituent of peritrophic membrane	name:Synonym:structural constituent of peritrophic matrix	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the peritrophic membrane, a tubular sheath of cuticle that shields the epithelial cells of the midgut from the gut contents. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0017056	name:Name:structural constituent of nuclear pore	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the nuclear pore complex.
0019911	name:Name:structural constituent of myelin sheath	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the myelin sheath of a nerve.
0030280	name:Name:structural constituent of epidermis	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of an epidermal cutaneous structure.
0030281	name:Name:structural constituent of cutaneous appendage	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of cutaneous epidermal structures such as hairs, scales, or feathers.
0030527	name:Name:structural constituent of chromatin	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of chromatin.
0032947	name:Name:protein complex scaffold	info:Definition:Functions to provide a physical support for the assembly of a multiprotein complex.
0005078	name:Name:MAP-kinase scaffold activity	name:Synonym:MAP-kinase scaffold protein activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that functions as a physical support for the assembly of a multiprotein mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) complex. Binds multiple kinases of the MAPKKK cascade, and also upstream signaling proteins, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way. Bringing together multiple enzymes and their substrates enables the signal to be transduced quickly and efficiently.
0030159	name:Name:receptor signaling complex scaffold activity	name:Synonym:receptor signaling complex scaffold protein activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling complex scaffold activity	info:Definition:Functions to provide a physical support for the assembly of a multiprotein receptor signaling complex.
0030160	name:Name:GKAP/Homer scaffold activity	name:Synonym:GKAP/Homer scaffold protein	name:Synonym:postsynaptic density scaffold protein	info:Definition:Functions as a physical support bridging the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-PSD-95-GKAP complex and the mGluR-Homer complex, which are involved in receptor signaling in synapses.
0035804	name:Name:structural constituent of egg coat	name:Synonym:structural constituent of vitelline envelope	name:Synonym:structural constituent of zona pellucida	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of an egg coat. An egg coat is a specialized extracellular matrix that surrounds the ovum of animals. The egg coat provides structural support and can play an essential role in oogenesis, fertilization and early development.
0008316	name:Name:structural constituent of vitelline membrane	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the vitelline membrane of an egg. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0042302	name:Name:structural constituent of cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a cuticle.
0005214	name:Name:structural constituent of chitin-based cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a chitin-based cuticle. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0008010	name:Name:structural constituent of chitin-based larval cuticle	name:Synonym:structural constituent of larval cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the chitin-based cuticle of a larva. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0008011	name:Name:structural constituent of pupal chitin-based cuticle	name:Synonym:structural constituent of pupal cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the chitin-based cuticle of a pupa. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0008012	name:Name:structural constituent of adult chitin-based cuticle	name:Synonym:structural constituent of adult cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of the chitin-based cuticle of an adult organism. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0042329	name:Name:structural constituent of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle	name:Synonym:structural constituent of cuticle	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle. An example of this process is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0043886	name:Name:structural constituent of carboxysome	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of a carboxysome, an organelle found in the Cyanobacteria consisting of a proteinaceous coat and enzymes for the fixation of carbon dioxide.
0097099	name:Name:structural constituent of albumen	name:Synonym:structural constituent of egg white	info:Definition:The action of a molecule that contributes to the structural integrity of albumen (also called egg white). Albumen is the clear liquid contained within an egg and consists of water and proteins, among which are ovomucin and ovomucoid. It protects the egg yolk and provides additional nutrition for the growth of the embryo.
0005215	name:Name:transporter activity	name:Synonym:small-molecule carrier or transporter	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0005487	name:Name:nucleocytoplasmic transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of substances between the nucleus and the cytoplasm of a cell.
0019534	name:Name:toxin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a toxin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. A toxin is a poisonous compound (typically a protein) that is produced by cells or organisms and that can cause disease when introduced into the body or tissues of an organism.
0000269	name:Name:toxin export channel activity	info:Definition:Enables the energy independent passage of toxins, sized less than 1000 Da, across a membrane towards the outside of the cell. The transmembrane portions of porins consist exclusively of beta-strands which form a beta-barrel. They are found in the outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria, plastids and possibly acid-fast Gram-positive bacteria.
0022857	name:Name:transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the transfer of a substance from one side of a membrane to the other.
0005326	name:Name:neurotransmitter transporter activity	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a neurotransmitter into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Neurotransmitters are any chemical substance that is capable of transmitting (or inhibiting the transmission of) a nerve impulse from a neuron to another cell.
0005277	name:Name:acetylcholine transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of acetylcholine from one side of the membrane to the other. Acetylcholine is an acetic acid ester of the organic base choline and functions as a neurotransmitter, released at the synapses of parasympathetic nerves and at neuromuscular junctions.
0005328	name:Name:neurotransmitter:sodium symporter activity	name:Synonym:sodium/neurotransmitter symporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: neurotransmitter(out) + Na+(out) = neurotransmitter(in) + Na+(in).
0015238	name:Name:drug transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:multidrug efflux pump activity	name:Synonym:multidrug transporter activity	name:Synonym:multidrug, alkane resistant pump activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a drug from one side of a membrane to the other. A drug is any naturally occurring or synthetic substance, other than a nutrient, that, when administered or applied to an organism, affects the structure or functioning of the organism; in particular, any such substance used in the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease.
0008559	name:Name:xenobiotic-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:ATP phosphohydrolase (steroid-exporting)	name:Synonym:ATP phosphohydrolase (xenobiotic-exporting)	name:Synonym:MDR protein	name:Synonym:multidrug resistance exporter	name:Synonym:multidrug-resistance protein	name:Synonym:P-glycoprotein	name:Synonym:PDR protein	name:Synonym:pleiotropic-drug-resistance protein	name:Synonym:steroid ABC transporter	name:Synonym:steroid-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:xenobiotic ABC transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O + xenobiotic(in) = ADP + phosphate + xenobiotic(out).
0015240	name:Name:amiloride transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of amiloride of amiloride into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Amiloride is a potent and specific inhibitor of sodium ion entry into cells. It is used as a potassium-sparing diuretic.
0015242	name:Name:benomyl transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of benomyl into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Benomyl, methyl 1-(butylcarbamoyl)-2-benzimidazolecarbamate, is a systemic agricultural fungicide used for control of certain fungal diseases of stone fruit.
0015307	name:Name:drug:hydrogen antiporter activity	name:Synonym:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone/nalidixic acid/organomercurials:hydrogen antiporter activity	name:Synonym:drug:proton antiporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: H+(out) + drug(in) = H+(in) + drug(out).
0015350	name:Name:methotrexate transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of methotrexate, 4-amino-10-methylformic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Methotrexate is a folic acid analogue and a potent competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase.
0015548	name:Name:organomercurial transporter activity	name:Synonym:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone/nalidixic acid/organomercurials:hydrogen antiporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of organomercurial compounds into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Organomercurial substances are any organic compound containing a mercury atom.
0015549	name:Name:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone transporter activity	name:Synonym:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone/nalidixic acid/organomercurials:hydrogen antiporter activity	name:Synonym:CCCP transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone is a proton ionophore, commonly used as an uncoupling agent and inhibitor of photosynthesis because of its effects on mitochondrial and chloroplast membranes.
0015566	name:Name:acriflavine transporter activity	name:Synonym:acriflavin resistant pump activity	name:Synonym:acriflavin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of acriflavin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Acriflavin is a fluorescent dye used as a local antiseptic and also as a biological stain. It intercalates into nucleic acids thereby inhibiting bacterial and viral replication.
0015567	name:Name:alkane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of alkanes into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Alkanes are saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon compounds.
0015638	name:Name:microcin uptake transporter activity	name:Synonym:microcin uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a microcin from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0042895	name:Name:antibiotic transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of an antibiotic, a substance produced by or derived from certain fungi, bacteria, and other organisms, that can destroy or inhibit the growth of other microorganisms, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0043216	name:Name:daunorubicin-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:daunorubicin ABC transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O + daunorubicin(in) = ADP + phosphate + daunorubicin(out).
0045118	name:Name:azole transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of azoles, heterocyclic compound found in many biologically important substances, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015562	name:Name:efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:efflux permease activity	name:Synonym:monocarboxylate (lactate, pyruvate, mevalonate) uptake/efflux porter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a specific substance or related group of substances from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0010329	name:Name:auxin efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:auxin efflux carrier	name:Synonym:auxin efflux facilitator	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of auxin, from one side of a membrane to the other, out of a cell.
0010542	name:Name:nitrate efflux transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of nitrate from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0015514	name:Name:nitrite efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:nitrite extrusion permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of nitrite from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0015523	name:Name:arabinose efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:arabinose efflux permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of arabinose from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane: H+(out) + arabinose(in) = H+(in) + arabinose(out).
0015634	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide exporter activity	name:Synonym:LPS exporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of lipopolysaccharide from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane. A lipopolysaccharide is any of a group of related, structurally complex components of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. Lipopolysaccharides consist three covalently linked regions, lipid A, core oligosaccharide, and an O side chain. Lipid A is responsible for the toxicity of the lipopolysaccharide.
0015660	name:Name:formate efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:formate efflux permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of formate from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0032523	name:Name:silicon efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:silicon efflux transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of silicon from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0034639	name:Name:L-amino acid efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:L-amino acid efflux permease activity	name:Synonym:L-amino acid export transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an L-amino acid from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0046583	name:Name:cation efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:cation efflux permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a cation or cations from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0080139	name:Name:borate efflux transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:boron efflux transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of borate from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell across a membrane.
0015563	name:Name:uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:cobalt, zinc uptake permease activity	name:Synonym:monocarboxylate (lactate, pyruvate, mevalonate) uptake/efflux porter activity	name:Synonym:uptake permease activity	name:Synonym:zinc, cadmium uptake permease activity	name:Synonym:zinc, iron permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a specific substance or related group of substances from the outside of a cell to the inside across a membrane.
0005274	name:Name:allantoin uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:allantoin permease activity	name:Synonym:allantoin/allantoate transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: allantoin(out) + H+(out) = allantoin(in) + H+(in) by secondary active transport.
0015318	name:Name:inorganic solute uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:inorganic uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an inorganic solute from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0015388	name:Name:potassium uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:potassium uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of potassium from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane: K+(out) + energy = K+(in).
0015403	name:Name:thiamine uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:thiamin uptake transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of thiamine from the outside of a cell to the inside across a membrane.
0015513	name:Name:nitrite uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:nitrite uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of nitrite from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0015558	name:Name:p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0015654	name:Name:tellurite uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:tellurite-resistance uptake permease activity	name:Synonym:tellurite-resistance uptake transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of tellurite from the outside of a cell to the inside across a membrane: tellurite(out) + H+(out) = tellurite(in) + H+(in).
0015659	name:Name:formate uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:formate uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of formate from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0080138	name:Name:borate uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:boron uptake transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of borate from the outside of a cell to the inside of the cell across a membrane.
0017077	name:Name:oxidative phosphorylation uncoupler activity	name:Synonym:mitochondrial uncoupling protein activity	name:Synonym:uncoupling protein activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of protons from mitochondrial intermembrane space into mitochondrial matrix, dissipating the proton gradient across the mitochondrial inner membrane established by the electron transport chain during the oxidative phosphorylation (proton leak). Proton leak uncouples the processes of electron transport/proton generation and ATP synthesis.
0015522	name:Name:hydrophobic uncoupler:hydrogen antiporter activity	name:Synonym:hydrophobic uncoupler:proton antiporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: hydrophobic uncoupler(in) + H+(out) = hydrophobic uncoupler(out) + H+(in). Hydrophobic uncouplers include CCCP, benzalkonium and SDS.
0022803	name:Name:passive transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute from one side of the membrane to the other, down the solute's concentration gradient.
0015267	name:Name:channel activity	name:Synonym:alpha-type channel activity	name:Synonym:channel-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:channel/pore class transporter activity	name:Synonym:nonselective channel activity	name:Synonym:pore activity	name:Synonym:pore class transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of energy-independent facilitated diffusion, mediated by passage of a solute through a transmembrane aqueous pore or channel. Stereospecificity is not exhibited but this transport may be specific for a particular molecular species or class of molecules.
0022809	name:Name:mobile ion carrier activity	name:Synonym:ionophore	info:Definition:This is a type of carrier produced by bacteria. It enable passive transport by shielding the ion that is being transported from the lipid membrane. It carries an ion across the membrane by enclosing the ion and travelling across the membrane. It does not form a fully open pore across the membrane.
0022804	name:Name:active transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:active carrier activity	name:Synonym:carrier activity	name:Synonym:permease activity	name:Synonym:pump activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a specific substance or related group of substances from one side of a membrane to the other, up the solute's concentration gradient. The transporter binds the solute and undergoes a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction.
0005275	name:Name:amine transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:amine/amide/polyamine channel activity	name:Synonym:amine/polyamine transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:amino acid-polyamine transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of amines, including polyamines, from one side of the membrane to the other. Amines are organic compounds that are weakly basic in character and contain an amino (-NH2) or substituted amino group.
0008982	name:Name:protein-N(PI)-phosphohistidine-sugar phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:enzyme II of the phosphotransferase system	name:Synonym:enzyme IIl4ac	name:Synonym:gene bglC RNA formation factors	name:Synonym:gene glC proteins	name:Synonym:group translocator activity	name:Synonym:PEP--sugar phosphotransferase enzyme II activity	name:Synonym:PEP-dependent phosphotransferase enzyme II	name:Synonym:phosphoenolpyruvate-sugar phosphotransferase enzyme II	name:Synonym:phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose phosphoribosyltransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphoprotein factor-hexose phosophotransferase activity	name:Synonym:phosphotransfer-driven group translocator	name:Synonym:phosphotransferase, phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose activity	name:Synonym:protein, specific or class, gene bglC	name:Synonym:protein-Np-phosphohistidine-sugar phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:protein-Npi-phospho-L-histidine:sugar N-pros-phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:protein-Npi-phospho-L-histidine:sugar Npi-phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:protein-Npi-phosphohistidine-sugar phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:protein-Npi-phosphohistidine:sugar N-pros-phosphotransferase activity	name:Synonym:PTS permease activity	name:Synonym:PTS transporter	name:Synonym:ribonucleic acid formation factor, gene glC	name:Synonym:sucrose phosphotransferase system II	info:Definition:Catalysis of the PEP-dependent, phosphoryl transfer-driven transport of substances across a membrane. The transport happens by catalysis of the reaction: protein N-phosphohistidine + sugar(out) = protein histidine + sugar phosphate(in). This differs from primary and secondary active transport in that the solute is modified during transport.
0015291	name:Name:secondary active transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:active transporter	name:Synonym:coupled carrier	name:Synonym:electrochemical potential-driven transporter activity	name:Synonym:energizer of outer membrane receptor-mediated transport activity	name:Synonym:galactose/glucose (methylgalactoside) porter activity	name:Synonym:heavy metal ion porter activity	name:Synonym:ion-gradient-driven energizer activity	name:Synonym:multidrug endosomal transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:nitrite/nitrate porter activity	name:Synonym:porter activity	name:Synonym:porters	name:Synonym:secondary carrier-type facilitators	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute from one side of a membrane to the other, up its concentration gradient. The transporter binds the solute and undergoes a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction and is driven by a chemiosmotic source of energy. Chemiosmotic sources of energy include uniport, symport or antiport.
0015399	name:Name:primary active transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:primary active transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute from one side of the membrane to the other, up the solute's concentration gradient, by binding the solute and undergoing a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction and is powered by a primary energy source. Primary energy sources known to be coupled to transport are chemical, electrical and solar sources.
0022853	name:Name:active ion transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an ion from one side of a membrane to the other up the solute's concentration gradient. This is carried out by binding the solute and undergoing a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction.
0022865	name:Name:transmembrane electron transfer carrier	info:Definition:Enables electron flow across a biological membrane, from donors localized on one side of the membrane to acceptors localized on the other side. These systems contribute to or subtract from the membrane potential, depending on the direction of electron flow. They are therefore important to cellular energetics.
0022866	name:Name:transmembrane 1-electron transfer carrier	name:Synonym:transmembrane one-electron transfer carrier	info:Definition:Enables transfer of one electron across a membrane.
0022867	name:Name:transmembrane 2-electron transfer carrier	name:Synonym:transmembrane two-electron transfer carrier	info:Definition:Enables transfer of two electrons across a membrane.
0022891	name:Name:substrate-specific transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the transfer of a specific substance or group of related substances from one side of a membrane to the other.
0005342	name:Name:organic acid transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of organic acids, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage, from one side of the membrane to the other.
0005372	name:Name:water transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of water (H2O) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0010290	name:Name:chlorophyll catabolite transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of chlorophyll catabolites such as non-fluorescent chlorophyll catabolites (NCCs), from one side of the membrane to the other.
0015075	name:Name:ion transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:ion transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an ion from one side of a membrane to the other.
0015144	name:Name:carbohydrate transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:sugar transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of carbohydrate from one side of the membrane to the other.
0015227	name:Name:acyl carnitine transporter activity	name:Synonym:acylcarnitine transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of acyl carnitine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Acyl carnitine is the condensation product of a carboxylic acid and carnitine and is the transport form for a fatty acid crossing the mitochondrial membrane.
0015228	name:Name:coenzyme A transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:coenzyme A transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of coenzyme A across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Coenzyme A, 3'-phosphoadenosine-(5')diphospho(4')pantatheine, is an acyl carrier in many acylation and acyl-transfer reactions in which the intermediate is a thiol ester.
0015230	name:Name:FAD transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:FAD transporter activity	name:Synonym:flavin adenine dinucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:flavin-adenine dinucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD) across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. FAD forms the coenzyme of the prosthetic group of various flavoprotein oxidoreductase enzymes, in which it functions as an electron acceptor by being reversibly converted to its reduced form.
0015234	name:Name:thiamine transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:thiamin permease activity	name:Synonym:thiamin transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:thiamine permease activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of thiamine from one side of the membrane to the other. Thiamine is vitamin B1, a water soluble vitamin present in fresh vegetables and meats, especially liver.
0015663	name:Name:nicotinamide mononucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:nicotinamide mononucleotide permease activity	name:Synonym:nicotinamide ribonucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of nicotinamide mononucleotide into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Nicotinamide mononucleotide is a ribonucleotide in which the nitrogenous base, nicotinamide, is in beta-n-glycosidic linkage with the c-1 position of d-ribose. It is a constituent of NAD and NADP.
0015665	name:Name:alcohol transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of an alcohol from one side of the membrane to the other. An alcohol is any carbon compound that contains a hydroxyl group.
0015932	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of nucleobases, nucleosides, nucleotides and nucleic acids from one side of a membrane to the other.
0022838	name:Name:substrate-specific channel activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of energy-independent facilitated diffusion, mediated by passage of a specific solute through a transmembrane aqueous pore or channel. Stereospecificity is not exhibited but this transport may be specific for a particular molecular species or class of molecules.
0022884	name:Name:macromolecule transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a macromolecule from one side of the membrane to the other.
0030184	name:Name:nitric oxide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide, from one side of a membrane to the other.
0031925	name:Name:pyridoxal transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxal transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of pyridoxal across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Pyridoxal, 3-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methyl-4-pyridinecarboxaldehyde, is one of the vitamin B6 compounds. Pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine are collectively known as vitamin B6, and are efficiently converted to the biologically active form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal phosphate.
0031926	name:Name:pyridoxal phosphate transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of pyridoxal phosphate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells; pyridoxal phosphate is pyridoxal phosphorylated at the hydroxymethyl group of C-5, and is the active form of vitamin B6.
0031927	name:Name:pyridoxamine transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of pyridoxamine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Pyridoxamine, 4-(aminomethyl)-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyridin-3-ol, is one of the vitamin B6 compounds. Pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine are collectively known as vitamin B6, and are efficiently converted to the biologically active form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal phosphate.
0031928	name:Name:pyridoxine transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:pyridoxine transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of pyridoxine across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Pyridoxine, 2-methyl-3-hydroxy-4,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)pyridine, is one of the vitamin B6 compounds. Pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine are collectively known as vitamin B6, and are efficiently converted to the biologically active form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal phosphate.
0035379	name:Name:carbon dioxide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the transfer of carbon dioxide (CO2) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0035673	name:Name:oligopeptide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of oligopeptides from one side of the membrane to the other.
0042887	name:Name:amide transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:amine/amide/polyamine channel activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of an amide, any compound containing one, two, or three acyl groups attached to a nitrogen atom, from one side of the membrane to the other.
0042971	name:Name:lactone transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of lactone from one side of a membrane to the other. A lactone is a cyclic ester of a hydroxy carboxylic acid, containing a 1-oxacycloalkan-2-one structure, or an analogue having unsaturation or heteroatoms replacing one or more carbon atoms of the ring.
0051739	name:Name:ammonia transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of ammonia from one side of the membrane to the other.
0080161	name:Name:auxin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of auxins from one side of the membrane to the other. Auxins are plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0051183	name:Name:vitamin transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin or cofactor transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of vitamins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. A vitamin is one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0008517	name:Name:folic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:folate transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B9 transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin M transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Folic acid is widely distributed as a member of the vitamin B complex and is essential for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidines.
0008523	name:Name:sodium-dependent multivitamin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: multivitamin(out) + Na+(out) = multivitamin(in) + Na+(in). Multivitamins include pantothenate, biotin and lipoate.
0015225	name:Name:biotin transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B7 transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin H transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of biotin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Biotin is cis-tetrahydro-2-oxothieno(3,4-d)imidazoline-4-valeric acid; the (+) enantiomer is very widely distributed in cells and serves as a carrier in a number of enzymatic beta-carboxylation reactions.
0015229	name:Name:L-ascorbic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:L-ascorbate transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin C transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of L-ascorbate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. L-ascorbate, (2R)-2-[(1S)-1,2-dihydroxyethyl]-4-hydroxy-5-oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-olate, is vitamin C and has co-factor and anti-oxidant activities in many species.
0015233	name:Name:pantothenate transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:pantothenate transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B5 transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of pantothenate across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Pantothenate is the anion of pantothenic acid, the amide of beta-alanine and pantoic acid; it is a B complex vitamin that is a constituent of coenzyme A and is distributed ubiquitously in foods.
0015235	name:Name:cobalamin transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin B12 transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of cobalamin (vitamin B12), a water-soluble vitamin characterized by possession of a corrin nucleus containing a cobalt atom, into, out of or within a cell.
0031924	name:Name:vitamin B6 transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of any of the vitamin B6 compounds -- pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine and the active form, pyridoxal phosphate -- into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0032217	name:Name:riboflavin transporter activity	info:Definition:Facilitates the directed movement of riboflavin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Riboflavin (vitamin B2) is a water-soluble B-complex vitamin, converted in the cell to FMN and FAD, cofactors required for the function of flavoproteins.
0033300	name:Name:dehydroascorbic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:dehydroascorbate transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of dehydroascorbate, 5-(1,2-dihydroxyethyl)furan-2,3,4(5H)-trione, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0034632	name:Name:retinol transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of retinol into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Retinol is vitamin A1, 2,6,6-trimethyl-1-(9'-hydroxy-3',7'-dimethylnona-1',3',5',7'-tetraenyl)cyclohex-1-ene, one of the three components that makes up vitamin A.
0071992	name:Name:phytochelatin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a phytochelatin across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Phytochelatins are a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes.
0022892	name:Name:substrate-specific transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a specific substance or group of related substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0000036	name:Name:acyl carrier activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of acyl groups into, out of, within or between cells.
0005319	name:Name:lipid transporter activity	name:Synonym:apolipoprotein	name:Synonym:lipophorin	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of lipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0005548	name:Name:phospholipid transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of phospholipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Phospholipids are a class of lipids containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
0015245	name:Name:fatty acid transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of fatty acids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Fatty acids are aliphatic monocarboxylic acids liberated from naturally occurring fats and oils by hydrolysis.
0015246	name:Name:fatty-acyl group transporter activity	name:Synonym:fatty acyl transporter activity	name:Synonym:peroxisomal fatty acyl transporter	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a fatty acyl group into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. A fatty acyl group is any acyl group derived from a fatty acid.
0015248	name:Name:sterol transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of sterols into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Sterol are steroids with one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0017089	name:Name:glycolipid transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of glycolipids, compounds containing (usually) 1-4 linked monosaccharide residues joined by a glycosyl linkage to a lipid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0034040	name:Name:lipid-transporting ATPase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: ATP + H2O + lipid(in) = ADP + phosphate + lipid(out).
0046624	name:Name:sphingolipid transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of sphingolipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Sphingolipids are a class of lipids containing the long-chain amine diol sphingosine or a closely related base (a sphingoid).
0005344	name:Name:oxygen transporter activity	name:Synonym:globin	name:Synonym:hemerythrin	name:Synonym:hemocyanin	name:Synonym:oxygen-carrying	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of oxygen into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0008565	name:Name:protein transporter activity	name:Synonym:enzyme transporter activity	name:Synonym:holin	name:Synonym:protein carrier activity	name:Synonym:protein transport chaperone	name:Synonym:secretin	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of proteins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0008262	name:Name:importin-alpha export receptor activity	name:Synonym:importin-alpha binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with importin-alpha to mediate its transfer through the nuclear pore to the cytoplasm.
0008320	name:Name:protein transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a protein from one side of a membrane to the other.
0015474	name:Name:autotransporter activity	info:Definition:Transports a passenger protein from the periplasm to the external milieu; the passenger protein and the porin are the N- and C-terminal regions of the same protein, respectively.
0015557	name:Name:arginine targeting transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of fully folded proteins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by targeting the proteins to the transporter via a specialized N-terminal twin arginine signal peptide.
0032977	name:Name:membrane insertase activity	info:Definition:Mediates the integration of proteins into a membrane from the inner side of the membrane. Membrane insertases are highly conserved and include the bacterial YidC family, the plant chloroplast Alb3 family, and the fungal and animal mitochondrial Oxa1/Cox18 family.
0034437	name:Name:glycoprotein transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a glycoprotein, any protein that contains covalently bound glycose (i.e. monosaccharide) residues, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042954	name:Name:lipoprotein transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of any conjugated, water-soluble protein in which the nonprotein group consists of a lipid or lipids, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015197	name:Name:peptide transporter activity	name:Synonym:peptide uptake permease activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of peptides, compounds of two or more amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015198	name:Name:oligopeptide transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of oligopeptides into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Oligopeptides are molecules that contain a small number (2 to 20) of amino-acid residues connected by peptide linkages.
0015324	name:Name:peptide-acetyl-CoA secondary active transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:peptide-acetyl-CoA transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of peptide-acetyl-CoA from one side of a membrane to the other, up its concentration gradient. The transporter binds the solute and undergoes a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction and is driven by a chemiosmotic source of energy. Chemiosmotic sources of energy include uniport, symport or antiport.
0015440	name:Name:peptide-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:ATP phosphohydrolase (peptide-exporting)	name:Synonym:peptide ABC transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O + peptide(in) = ADP + phosphate + peptide(out). Peptides exported include alpha-hemolysin, cyclolysin, colicin V and siderophores from Gram-negative bacteria, and bacteriocin, subtilin, competence factor and pediocin from Gram-positive bacteria.
0015640	name:Name:peptidoglycan peptide transporter activity	name:Synonym:murein peptide transporter activity	name:Synonym:muropeptide transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of peptidoglycan peptides into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Peptidoglycan peptides are the oligopeptides found in peptidoglycan networks which cross-link the polysaccharide chains.
0022897	name:Name:proton-dependent peptide secondary active transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:hydrogen/oligopeptide symporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a peptide from one side of a membrane to the other, up its concentration gradient. The transporter binds the solute and undergoes a series of conformational changes. Transport works equally well in either direction and is driven by proton movement.
0071991	name:Name:phytochelatin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a phytochelatin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Phytochelatins are a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes.
0015647	name:Name:peptidoglycan transporter activity	name:Synonym:murein transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of peptidoglycans, a class of glycoconjugates found in bacterial cell walls, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015648	name:Name:lipid-linked peptidoglycan transporter activity	name:Synonym:lipid-linked murein transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of lipid-linked peptidoglycans into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042910	name:Name:xenobiotic transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a xenobiotic, a compound foreign to living organisms, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015547	name:Name:nalidixic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone/nalidixic acid/organomercurials:hydrogen antiporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of nalidixic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Nalidixic acid is a synthetic antibiotic that interferes with DNA gyrase and inhibits prokaryotic replication.
0042911	name:Name:acridine transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of acridine (10-azaanthracene), a heterocyclic ring compound found in crude coal-tar anthracene, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042962	name:Name:acridine:hydrogen antiporter activity	name:Synonym:acridine efflux pump activity	name:Synonym:acridine:proton antiporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: H+(out) + acridine(in) = H+(in) + acridine(out).
0042925	name:Name:benzoate transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of benzoate, the anion of benzoic acid (benzenecarboxylic acid) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042926	name:Name:3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid transporter activity	name:Synonym:m-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of 3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042959	name:Name:alkanesulfonate transporter activity	name:Synonym:alkanesulphonate transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of alkanesulfonate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042927	name:Name:siderophore transporter activity	name:Synonym:siderochrome transporter activity	name:Synonym:siderophore-iron transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of siderophores, low molecular weight Fe(III)-chelating substances, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015343	name:Name:siderophore transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:iron-siderophore transporter activity	name:Synonym:siderochrome-iron transporter activity	name:Synonym:siderophore-iron transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: siderophore-iron(out) + H+(out) = siderophore-iron(in) + H+(in).
0015344	name:Name:siderophore uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:ferrioxamine uptake transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:siderochrome-iron (ferrioxamine) uptake transporter	name:Synonym:siderophore-iron uptake transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: siderophore-iron(ferrioxamine)(out) + H+(out) = siderophore-iron(ferrioxamine)(in) + H+(in).
0015346	name:Name:ferric triacetylfusarinine C:hydrogen symporter activity	name:Synonym:ferric triacetylfusarinine C:proton symporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: ferric triacetylfusarinine C(out) + H+(out) = ferric triacetylfusarinine C(in) + H+(in).
0015620	name:Name:ferric-enterobactin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of ferric-enterobactin from one side of a membrane to the other.
0015622	name:Name:ferric-hydroxamate transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of ferric-hydroxamate from one side of a membrane to the other.
0019535	name:Name:ferric-vibriobactin transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of ferric-vibriobactin ions from one side of a membrane to the other.
0042929	name:Name:ferrichrome transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a ferrichrome into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Ferrichromes are any of a group of growth-promoting Fe(III) chelates formed by various genera of microfungi. They are homodetic cyclic hexapeptides made up of a tripeptide of glycine (or other small neutral amino acids) and a tripeptide of an N'acyl-N4-hydroxy-L-ornithine.
0042931	name:Name:enterobactin transporter activity	name:Synonym:enterochelin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of the siderochrome enterochelin, a cyclic trimer of 2, 3 dihydroxybenzoylserine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042933	name:Name:chrysobactin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of the siderophore chrysobactin (alpha-N-(2,3-dihydroxybenzoyl)-D-lysyl-L-serine) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0042934	name:Name:achromobactin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of achromobactin, a citrate siderophore, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0043563	name:Name:odorant transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of odorants, any substance capable of stimulating the sense of smell, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0051184	name:Name:cofactor transporter activity	name:Synonym:vitamin or cofactor transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a cofactor into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. A cofactor is a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein.
0005308	name:Name:creatine transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of creatine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Creatine is a compound synthesized from the amino acids arginine, glycine, and methionine that occurs in muscle.
0005309	name:Name:creatine:sodium symporter activity	name:Synonym:sodium/chloride-dependent creatine transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of a solute or solutes from one side of a membrane to the other according to the reaction: creatine(out) + Na+(out) = creatine(in) + Na+(in).
0015224	name:Name:biopterin transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of biopterin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Biopterin is a growth factor for certain protozoans and some insects; it is widely distributed in tissues and functions in a reduced form, tetrahydrobiopterin, as a hydroxylation coenzyme.
0015232	name:Name:heme transporter activity	name:Synonym:haem transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells.
0015439	name:Name:heme-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:ATP phosphohydrolase (heme-exporting)	name:Synonym:haem-transporting ATPase activity	name:Synonym:heme ABC transporter	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O + heme(in) = ADP + phosphate + heme(out).
0051185	name:Name:coenzyme transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of a coenzyme into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. A coenzyme is any of various nonprotein organic cofactors that are required, in addition to an enzyme and a substrate, for an enzymatic reaction to proceed.
0000095	name:Name:S-adenosylmethionine transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine permease activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine transporter activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethionine permease activity	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethionine transporter activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the transfer of S-adenosylmethionine from one side of a membrane to the other. S-adenosylmethionine is S-(5'-adenosyl)-L-methionine, an important intermediate in one-carbon metabolism.
0008521	name:Name:acetyl-CoA transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of acetyl-CoA into, out of or within a cell, or between cells. Acetyl-CoA is a derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is acetylated; it is a metabolite derived from several pathways (e.g. glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation, amino-acid catabolism) and is further metabolized by the tricarboxylic acid cycle. It is a key intermediate in lipid and terpenoid biosynthesis.
0051724	name:Name:NAD transporter activity	name:Synonym:NAD (oxidized) transporter activity	name:Synonym:NAD (reduced) transporter activity	name:Synonym:NAD+ transporter activity	name:Synonym:NADH transporter activity	name:Synonym:nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:oxidized NAD transporter activity	name:Synonym:oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	name:Synonym:reduced NAD transporter activity	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide into, out of or within a cell, or between cells; transport may be of either the oxidized form, NAD, or the reduced form, NADH.
0005488	name:Name:binding	name:Synonym:ligand	info:Definition:The selective, non-covalent, often stoichiometric, interaction of a molecule with one or more specific sites on another molecule.
0000035	name:Name:acyl binding	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA or acyl binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an acyl group, any group formally derived by removal of the hydroxyl group from the acid function of a carboxylic acid.
0000166	name:Name:nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nucleotide, any compound consisting of a nucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the ribose or deoxyribose.
0008327	name:Name:methyl-CpG binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a methylated cytosine/guanine dinucleotide.
0010181	name:Name:FMN binding	name:Synonym:flavin mononucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with FMN, flavin mononucleotide, the coenzyme or the prosthetic group of various flavoprotein oxidoreductase enzymes.
0010428	name:Name:methyl-CpNpG binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a methylated cytosine/unspecified/guanine trinucleotide.
0010429	name:Name:methyl-CpNpN binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a methylated cytosine/unspecified/unspecified trinucleotide.
0017076	name:Name:purine nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with purine nucleotides, any compound consisting of a purine nucleoside esterified with (ortho)phosphate.
0019001	name:Name:guanyl nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with guanyl nucleotides, any compound consisting of guanosine esterified with (ortho)phosphate.
0030554	name:Name:adenyl nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with adenyl nucleotides, any compound consisting of adenosine esterified with (ortho)phosphate.
0032554	name:Name:purine deoxyribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine deoxyribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a purine deoxyribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose moiety.
0032555	name:Name:purine ribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine ribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a purine ribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the ribose moiety.
0019103	name:Name:pyrimidine nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyrimidine nucleotide, any compound consisting of a pyrimidine nucleoside esterified with (ortho)phosphate.
0032556	name:Name:pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose moiety.
0032557	name:Name:pyrimidine ribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine ribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a pyrimidine ribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the ribose moiety.
0030551	name:Name:cyclic nucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a cyclic nucleotide, a nucleotide in which the phosphate group is in diester linkage to two positions on the sugar residue.
0030552	name:Name:cAMP binding	name:Synonym:3',5' cAMP binding	name:Synonym:3',5'-cAMP binding	name:Synonym:adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate binding	name:Synonym:cyclic AMP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cAMP, the nucleotide cyclic AMP (adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate).
0030553	name:Name:cGMP binding	name:Synonym:3',5' cGMP binding	name:Synonym:3',5'-cGMP binding	name:Synonym:cyclic GMP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cGMP, the nucleotide cyclic GMP (guanosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate).
0035438	name:Name:cyclic-di-GMP binding	name:Synonym:3',5'-cyclic di-GMP binding	name:Synonym:c-di-GMP binding	name:Synonym:cyclic dinucleotide di-GMP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cyclic-di-GMP, cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate.
0032552	name:Name:deoxyribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a deoxyribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a deoxyribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose moiety.
0032553	name:Name:ribonucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a ribonucleotide, any compound consisting of a ribonucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate or an oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the ribose moiety.
0050661	name:Name:NADP binding	name:Synonym:NADP or NADPH binding	name:Synonym:NADP+ or NADPH binding	name:Synonym:nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions; binding may be to either the oxidized form, NADP+, or the reduced form, NADPH.
0070401	name:Name:NADP+ binding	name:Synonym:NADP (oxidized) binding	name:Synonym:NADP binding	name:Synonym:oxidized NADP binding	name:Synonym:oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the oxidized form, NADP+, of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions.
0070402	name:Name:NADPH binding	name:Synonym:NADP (reduced) binding	name:Synonym:reduced NADP binding	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the reduced form, NADPH, of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions.
0051287	name:Name:NAD binding	name:Synonym:NAD or NADH binding	name:Synonym:NAD+ or NADH binding	name:Synonym:nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions; binding may be to either the oxidized form, NAD+, or the reduced form, NADH.
0070403	name:Name:NAD+ binding	name:Synonym:NAD (oxidized) binding	name:Synonym:NAD binding	name:Synonym:oxidized NAD binding	name:Synonym:oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the oxidized form, NAD, of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions.
0070404	name:Name:NADH binding	name:Synonym:NAD (reduced) binding	name:Synonym:reduced NAD binding	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the reduced form, NADH, of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, a coenzyme involved in many redox and biosynthetic reactions.
0001530	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide binding	name:Synonym:endotoxin binding	name:Synonym:LPS binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lipopolysaccharide.
0001871	name:Name:pattern binding	name:Synonym:pattern recognition activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a repeating or polymeric structure, such as a polysaccharide or peptidoglycan.
0001876	name:Name:lipoarabinomannan binding	name:Synonym:LAM binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lipoarabinomannan.
0030247	name:Name:polysaccharide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any polysaccharide, a polymer of more than 20 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages.
0001872	name:Name:1,3-beta-D-glucan binding	name:Synonym:zymosan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 1,3-beta-D-glucans.
0005539	name:Name:glycosaminoglycan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any glycan (polysaccharide) containing a substantial proportion of aminomonosaccharide residues.
0008061	name:Name:chitin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with chitin, a linear polysaccharide consisting of P-1,4-linked N-acetyl-D-glucosamine residues.
0010297	name:Name:heteropolysaccharide binding	name:Synonym:heteroglycan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with heteropolysaccharides. A heteropolysaccharide is a glycan composed of more than one type of monosaccharide residue.
0030248	name:Name:cellulose binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cellulose.
0048028	name:Name:galacturonan binding	name:Synonym:polygalacturonide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any simple or complex galacturonan. Galacturonan is any glycan composed solely of galacturonic acid residues, a specific type of glycuronan, and a constituent of some pectins.
0072572	name:Name:poly-ADP-D-ribose binding	name:Synonym:pADPr binding	name:Synonym:poly-ADP-ribose binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with polymeric ADP-D-ribose, a polymer that is composed of poly-ADP-D-ribose units linked through 1,2-glycosidic bonds at the ribose ring.
0080087	name:Name:callose binding	name:Synonym:callose binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with callose. Callose is a linear 1,3-beta-D-glucan formed from UDP-glucose and is found in certain plant cell walls.
0001882	name:Name:nucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine or pyrimidine nitrogenous base linked either to ribose or deoxyribose.
0001883	name:Name:purine nucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine nucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine base linked either to ribose or deoxyribose.
0032547	name:Name:purine deoxyribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine deoxyribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine base linked to deoxyribose.
0032550	name:Name:purine ribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine ribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine base linked to ribose.
0001884	name:Name:pyrimidine nucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine nucleoside, a compound consisting of a pyrimidine base linked either to ribose or deoxyribose.
0032548	name:Name:pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a pyrimidine base linked to deoxyribose.
0032551	name:Name:pyrimidine ribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine ribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a pyrimidine base linked to ribose.
0032546	name:Name:deoxyribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a deoxyribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine or pyrimidine nitrogenous base linked to deoxyribose.
0032549	name:Name:ribonucleoside binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a ribonucleoside, a compound consisting of a purine or pyrimidine nitrogenous base linked to ribose.
0002054	name:Name:nucleobase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nucleobase, any of a class of pyrmidines or purines, organic nitrogenous bases.
0002060	name:Name:purine base binding	name:Synonym:purine binding	name:Synonym:purine nucleobase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a purine base, an organic nitrogenous base with a purine skeleton.
0002055	name:Name:adenine binding	name:Synonym:6-aminopurine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with adenine, a purine base.
0002057	name:Name:guanine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with guanine.
0002061	name:Name:pyrimidine base binding	name:Synonym:1,3-diazine binding	name:Synonym:pyrimidine base binding	name:Synonym:pyrimidine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pyrimidine base, an organic nitrogenous base with a pyrimidine skeleton.
0002056	name:Name:cytosine binding	info:Definition:Interactiing selectively with cytosine.
0002058	name:Name:uracil binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with uracil.
0002059	name:Name:thymine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thymine.
0003676	name:Name:nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any nucleic acid.
0000496	name:Name:base pairing	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nucleic acid via hydrogen bonds between the bases of a gene product molecule and the bases of a target nucleic acid molecule.
0000497	name:Name:base pairing with DNA	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nucleic acid via hydrogen bonds between the bases of a gene product molecule and the bases of a target DNA molecule.
0000498	name:Name:base pairing with RNA	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ribonucleic acid (RNA) via hydrogen bonds between the bases of a gene product molecule and the bases of a target RNA molecule.
0001067	name:Name:regulatory region nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nucleic acid region that regulates a nucleic acid-based process. Such processes include transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
0000975	name:Name:regulatory region DNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a DNA region that regulates a DNA-based process. Such processes include transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
0001069	name:Name:regulatory region RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a RNA region that regulates a nucleic acid-based process. Such processes include transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
0003677	name:Name:DNA binding	name:Synonym:microtubule/chromatin interaction	name:Synonym:plasmid binding	info:Definition:Any molecular function by which a gene product interacts selectively with DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).
0003684	name:Name:damaged DNA binding	name:Synonym:DNA repair enzyme	name:Synonym:DNA repair protein	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with damaged DNA.
0003689	name:Name:DNA clamp loader activity	name:Synonym:DNA clamp loading ATPase activity	name:Synonym:PCNA loading activity	name:Synonym:PCNA loading complex activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O = ADP + phosphate, to drive the opening of the ring structure of the PCNA complex, or any of the related sliding clamp complexes, and their closing around the DNA duplex.
0008301	name:Name:DNA bending activity	info:Definition:An activity that results in binding to DNA and distorting the original structure of DNA, typically a straight helix, into a bend, or increasing the bend if the original structure was intrinsically bent due to its sequence.
0010844	name:Name:recombination hotspot binding	name:Synonym:DNA binding, recombination hotspot	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a region in a genome which promotes recombination.
0015616	name:Name:DNA translocase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: ATP + H2O = ADP + phosphate, to drive movement along a single- or double-stranded DNA molecule.
0043565	name:Name:sequence-specific DNA binding	name:Synonym:sequence specific DNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with DNA of a specific nucleotide composition, e.g. GC-rich DNA binding, or with a specific sequence motif or type of DNA e.g. promotor binding or rDNA binding.
0043566	name:Name:structure-specific DNA binding	name:Synonym:structure specific DNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with DNA of a specific structure or configuration e.g. triplex DNA binding or bent DNA binding.
0003723	name:Name:RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA molecule or a portion thereof.
0000049	name:Name:tRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with transfer RNA.
0000339	name:Name:RNA cap binding	name:Synonym:binding to mRNA cap	name:Synonym:mRNA cap binding	name:Synonym:snRNA cap binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 7-methylguanosine (m7G) group or derivative located at the 5' end of an RNA molecule.
0002151	name:Name:G-quadruplex RNA binding	name:Synonym:G quadruplex binding	name:Synonym:G quartet binding	name:Synonym:G quartet RNA binding	name:Synonym:G-quartet binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with G-quadruplex RNA structures, in which groups of four guanines adopt a flat, cyclic hydrogen-bonding arrangement known as a guanine tetrad.
0003725	name:Name:double-stranded RNA binding	name:Synonym:dsRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with double-stranded RNA.
0003727	name:Name:single-stranded RNA binding	name:Synonym:ssRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with single-stranded RNA.
0003729	name:Name:mRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) or messenger RNA (mRNA).
0008135	name:Name:translation factor activity, nucleic acid binding	name:Synonym:translation factor activity, RNA binding	info:Definition:Functions during translation by binding nucleic acids during polypeptide synthesis at the ribosome.
0008312	name:Name:7S RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 7S RNA, the RNA component of the signal recognition particle (SRP).
0017069	name:Name:snRNA binding	name:Synonym:small nuclear RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a small nuclear RNA (snRNA).
0017091	name:Name:AU-rich element binding	name:Synonym:Adenylate/uridylate-rich element binding	name:Synonym:ARE binding	name:Synonym:AU-specific RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a region of RNA containing frequent adenine and uridine bases.
0019843	name:Name:rRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ribosomal RNA.
0030515	name:Name:snoRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with small nucleolar RNA.
0033204	name:Name:ribonuclease P RNA binding	name:Synonym:RNase P RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the RNA subunit of ribonuclease P.
0034336	name:Name:misfolded RNA binding	name:Synonym:RNA chaperone	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA molecule that has assumed an incorrect conformation.
0034583	name:Name:21U-RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 21U-RNA, a 21-nucleotide RNA characterized by a uridine 5'-monophosphate and a modified 3' end resistant to periodate degradation. 21U-RNAs are derived from distinct, autonomously expressed loci within the genome.
0034584	name:Name:piRNA binding	name:Synonym:Piwi-associated RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a piRNA, a Piwi-associated RNA, a 24- to 30-nucleotide RNA derived from repeat or complex DNA sequence elements and processed by a Dicer-independent mechanism.
0035197	name:Name:siRNA binding	name:Synonym:small interfering RNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a small interfering RNA, a 21-23 nucleotide RNA that is processed from double stranded RNA (dsRNA) by an RNAse enzyme.
0035198	name:Name:miRNA binding	name:Synonym:microRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a microRNA, a 21-23 nucleotide RNA that is processed from a stem-loop RNA precursor (pre-miRNA) that is encoded within plant and animal genomes.
0035613	name:Name:RNA stem-loop binding	name:Synonym:RNA hairpin binding	name:Synonym:RNA hairpin loop binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a stem-loop in an RNA molecule. An RNA stem-loop is a secondary RNA structure consisting of a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) stem and a terminal loop.
0042835	name:Name:BRE binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the RNA element BRE (Bruno response element).
0070034	name:Name:telomeric RNA binding	name:Synonym:telomeric RNA repeat binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the telomerase RNA template or to RNA complementary to it.
0070878	name:Name:primary miRNA binding	name:Synonym:pri-miRNA binding	name:Synonym:primary microRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a primary microRNA (pri-miRNA) transcript, an RNA molecule that is processed into a short hairpin-shaped structure called a pre-miRNA and finally into a functional miRNA. Both double-stranded and single-stranded regions of a pri-miRNA are required for binding.
0070883	name:Name:pre-miRNA binding	name:Synonym:pre-microRNA binding	name:Synonym:precursor microRNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a precursor microRNA (pre-miRNA) transcript, a stem-loop-containing precursor of microRNA.
0071208	name:Name:histone pre-mRNA DCP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the downstream cleavage product (DCP) generated by histone pre-mRNA 3'-end processing.
0071667	name:Name:DNA/RNA hybrid binding	name:Synonym:RNA/DNA hybrid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a RNA/DNA hybrid.
0097098	name:Name:DNA/RNA hybrid annealing activity	info:Definition:Facilitates the base-pairing of single-stranded RNA to double-stranded DNA resulting in the formation of R-loops.
0090079	name:Name:translation regulator activity, nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:Any nucleic acid binding activity involved in the initiation, activation, perpetuation, repression or termination of polypeptide synthesis at the ribosome.
0000900	name:Name:translation repressor activity, nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:Antagonizes the ribosome-mediated translation of mRNA into a polypeptide via direct binding to nucleic acid.
0008494	name:Name:translation activator activity	info:Definition:Any of a group of soluble proteins functioning in the activation of ribosome-mediated translation of mRNA into a polypeptide.
0003682	name:Name:chromatin binding	name:Synonym:lamin/chromatin binding	name:Synonym:microtubule/chromatin interaction	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane vesicle binding to chromatin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with chromatin, the network of fibers of DNA and protein that make up the chromosomes of the eukaryotic nucleus during interphase.
0031490	name:Name:chromatin DNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with DNA that is assembled into chromatin.
0031492	name:Name:nucleosomal DNA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the DNA portion of a nucleosome.
0043035	name:Name:chromatin insulator sequence binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and stoichiometrically with a chromatin insulator sequence, a DNA sequence that prevents enhancer-mediated activation or repression of transcription.
0031491	name:Name:nucleosome binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nucleosome, a complex comprised of DNA wound around a multisubunit core and associated proteins, which forms the primary packing unit of DNA into higher order structures.
0031493	name:Name:nucleosomal histone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a histone that is assembled into a nucleosome.
0097030	name:Name:centromere-specific nucleosome binding	name:Synonym:centromeric nucleosome binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a centromere-specific nucleosome, a form of nucleosome located only at the centromere, in which the histone H3 is replaced by the variant form CENP-A (sometimes known as CenH3).
0003823	name:Name:antigen binding	name:Synonym:antibody	name:Synonym:B cell receptor activity	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin	name:Synonym:opsonin activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an antigen, any substance which is capable of inducing a specific immune response and of reacting with the products of that response, the specific antibody or specifically sensitized T-lymphocytes, or both. Binding may counteract the biological activity of the antigen.
0023023	name:Name:MHC protein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with the major histocompatibility complex.
0023024	name:Name:MHC class I protein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with the class I major histocompatibility complex.
0023025	name:Name:MHC class Ib protein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with the class Ib major histocompatibility complex.
0023026	name:Name:MHC class II protein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with the class II major histocompatibility complex.
0030882	name:Name:lipid antigen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipid antigen.
0030883	name:Name:endogenous lipid antigen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an endogenous cellular lipid antigen.
0030884	name:Name:exogenous lipid antigen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an exogenous lipid antigen (examples include microbial lipids and glycolipids).
0042605	name:Name:peptide antigen binding	name:Synonym:endogenous peptide antigen binding	name:Synonym:exogenous peptide antigen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an antigen peptide.
0005515	name:Name:protein binding	name:Synonym:alpha-2 macroglobulin receptor-associated protein activity	name:Synonym:protein amino acid binding	name:Synonym:protein degradation tagging activity	name:Synonym:protein folding chaperone	name:Synonym:protein tagging activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules).
0000149	name:Name:SNARE binding	name:Synonym:SNAP receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attached protein receptor) protein.
0019905	name:Name:syntaxin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a syntaxin, a SNAP receptor involved in the docking of synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic zone of a synapse.
0001098	name:Name:basal transcription machinery binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the basal transcription machinery which is composed of the RNA polymerase core enzyme and the basal transcription factor(s), the minimal set of factors required for formation of the preinitiation complex (PIC) by the RNA polymerase.
0001099	name:Name:basal RNA polymerase II transcription machinery binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the basal transcription machinery for RNA polymerase II which is composed of the RNA polymerase II core enzyme, a multisubunit eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerase typically composed of twelve subunits, and the basal RNA polymerase II transcription factors, the minimal set of factors required for formation of the preinitiation complex (PIC) by the RNA polymerase.
0001108	name:Name:bacterial-type RNA polymerase holo enzyme binding	name:Synonym:basal bacterial-type RNA polymerase transcription machinery binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the basal transcription machinery which is composed of a bacterial-type RNA polymerase core enzyme and a sigma factor, the minimal set of factors required for formation of the preinitiation complex (PIC) by a bacterial-type RNA polymerase.
0001540	name:Name:beta-amyloid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with beta-amyloid peptide/protein and/or its precursor.
0001846	name:Name:opsonin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an opsonin, such as a complement component or antibody, deposited on the surface of a bacteria, virus, immune complex, or other particulate material.
0001849	name:Name:complement component C1q binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C1q component of the classical complement cascade.
0001851	name:Name:complement component C3b binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C3b product of the complement cascade.
0001852	name:Name:complement component iC3b binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the iC3b product of the complement cascade.
0001855	name:Name:complement component C4b binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C4b product of the classical complement cascade.
0001862	name:Name:collectin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a collectin, a member of a group of structurally related pattern recognition molecules characterized by having a carbohydrate recognition domain of the C-type lectin family at the C-terminus and a collagenous domain at the N-terminus.
0001864	name:Name:pentraxin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pentraxin, a member of a family of inflammatory proteins with a radially symmetric arrangement of five identical, noncovalently linked chains in a pentagonal array.
0001848	name:Name:complement binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component or product of the complement cascade.
0001850	name:Name:complement component C3a binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C3a product of the complement cascade.
0001853	name:Name:complement component C3dg binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C3dg product of the complement cascade.
0001854	name:Name:complement component C3d binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C3d product of the complement cascade.
0001856	name:Name:complement component C5a binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the C5a product of the complement cascade.
0001918	name:Name:farnesylated protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a farnesylated protein.
0001948	name:Name:glycoprotein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a glycoprotein, a protein that contains covalently bound glycose (monosaccharide) residues. These also include proteoglycans.
0002162	name:Name:dystroglycan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with dystroglycan. Dystroglycan is glycoprotein found in non-muscle tissues as well as in muscle tissues, often in association with dystrophin. The native dystroglycan cleaved into two non-covalently associated subunits, alpha (N-terminal) and beta (C-terminal).
0043394	name:Name:proteoglycan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a proteoglycan, any glycoprotein in which the carbohydrate units are glycosaminoglycans.
0001965	name:Name:G-protein alpha-subunit binding	name:Synonym:G-alpha protein subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a G-protein alpha subunit. The alpha subunit binds a guanine nucleotide.
0001968	name:Name:fibronectin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a fibronectin, a group of related adhesive glycoproteins of high molecular weight found on the surface of animal cells, connective tissue matrices, and in extracellular fluids.
0002039	name:Name:p53 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one of the p53 family of proteins.
0002046	name:Name:opsin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an opsin, any of a group of hydrophobic, integral membrane glycoproteins located primarily in the disc membrane of rods or cones, involved in photoreception.
0016030	name:Name:metarhodopsin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with metarhodopsin, a transient intermediate produced upon irradiation of rhodopsin in the visual cycle and existing in two forms, metarhodopsins I and II. The latter dissociates to form opsin and all-trans retinal.
0005049	name:Name:nuclear export signal receptor activity	name:Synonym:NES receptor	info:Definition:Combining with a nuclear export signal to initiate a change in cell activity.
0005102	name:Name:receptor binding	name:Synonym:receptor ligand	name:Synonym:receptor-associated protein activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one or more specific sites on a receptor molecule, a macromolecule that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
0001515	name:Name:opioid peptide activity	info:Definition:Naturally occurring peptide that is an opioid (any non-alkaloid having an opiate-like effect that can be reversed by naloxone or other recognized morphine antagonist). These include Leu- and Met-enkephalin, dynorphin and neoendorphin, alpha, beta, gamma and delta endorphins formed from beta-lipotropin, various pronase-resistant peptides such as beta casamorphin, and other peptides whose opiate-like action seems to be indirect.
0001664	name:Name:G-protein-coupled receptor binding	name:Synonym:G protein coupled receptor binding	name:Synonym:G protein coupled receptor ligand	name:Synonym:G-protein-coupled receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a G-protein-coupled receptor.
0005112	name:Name:Notch binding	name:Synonym:N binding	name:Synonym:N ligand	name:Synonym:Notch ligand	name:Synonym:Notch receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the Notch (N) protein, a surface receptor.
0005113	name:Name:patched binding	name:Synonym:patched ligand	name:Synonym:ptc binding	name:Synonym:ptc ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the patched (ptc) protein, a receptor for hedgehog proteins.
0005115	name:Name:receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor binding	name:Synonym:receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor ligand	name:Synonym:Ror binding	name:Synonym:Ror ligand	info:Definition:Interaction with the receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor (Ror).
0005117	name:Name:wishful thinking binding	name:Synonym:SE20 receptor binding	name:Synonym:wishful thinking ligand	name:Synonym:Wit binding	name:Synonym:Wit ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with wishful thinking (Wit), a type II bone morphogenic protein receptor.
0005118	name:Name:sevenless binding	name:Synonym:sev binding	name:Synonym:sev ligand	name:Synonym:sevenless ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the sevenless (sev) protein, a receptor tyrosine kinase.
0005119	name:Name:smoothened binding	name:Synonym:smo binding	name:Synonym:smo ligand	name:Synonym:smoothened ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the smoothened (smo) protein, which interacts with patched to transmit hedgehog signals.
0005121	name:Name:Toll binding	name:Synonym:Tl binding	name:Synonym:Toll ligand	name:Synonym:Toll receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the Toll protein, a transmembrane receptor.
0005122	name:Name:torso binding	name:Synonym:tor binding	name:Synonym:tor ligand	name:Synonym:torso ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the torso (tor) protein, a receptor tyrosine kinase.
0005124	name:Name:scavenger receptor binding	name:Synonym:scavenger receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with scavenger receptors, a family of proteins that are expressed on myeloid cells and are involved in the uptake of effete cellular components and foreign particles.
0005125	name:Name:cytokine activity	name:Synonym:autocrine activity	name:Synonym:paracrine activity	info:Definition:Functions to control the survival, growth, differentiation and effector function of tissues and cells.
0005126	name:Name:cytokine receptor binding	name:Synonym:hematopoietin/interferon-class (D200-domain) cytokine receptor binding	name:Synonym:hematopoietin/interferon-class (D200-domain) cytokine receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with a cytokine receptor.
0005158	name:Name:insulin receptor binding	name:Synonym:insulin receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the insulin receptor.
0005159	name:Name:insulin-like growth factor receptor binding	name:Synonym:IGF receptor binding	name:Synonym:insulin-like growth factor	name:Synonym:insulin-like growth factor receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the insulin-like growth factor receptor.
0005176	name:Name:ErbB-2 class receptor binding	name:Synonym:ErbB-2 class receptor ligand	name:Synonym:HER2 receptor binding	name:Synonym:HER2 receptor ligand	name:Synonym:Neu receptor binding	name:Synonym:Neu receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the protein-tyrosine kinase receptor Neu/ErbB-2/HER2.
0005178	name:Name:integrin binding	name:Synonym:integrin ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an integrin.
0005179	name:Name:hormone activity	name:Synonym:cAMP generating peptide activity	name:Synonym:glycopeptide hormone	name:Synonym:lipopeptide hormone	name:Synonym:peptide hormone	info:Definition:The action characteristic of a hormone, any substance formed in very small amounts in one specialized organ or group of cells and carried (sometimes in the bloodstream) to another organ or group of cells in the same organism, upon which it has a specific regulatory action. The term was originally applied to agents with a stimulatory physiological action in vertebrate animals (as opposed to a chalone, which has a depressant action). Usage is now extended to regulatory compounds in lower animals and plants, and to synthetic substances having comparable effects; all bind receptors and trigger some biological process.
0005186	name:Name:pheromone activity	info:Definition:The activity of binding to and activating specific cell surface receptors, thereby inducing behavioral, developmental, or physiological response(s) from a responding organism or cell. The substance may be released or retained on the cell surface. Pheromones may serve as a specific attractant, social communicator, or sexual stimulant.
0008083	name:Name:growth factor activity	info:Definition:The function that stimulates a cell to grow or proliferate. Most growth factors have other actions besides the induction of cell growth or proliferation.
0016922	name:Name:ligand-dependent nuclear receptor binding	name:Synonym:ligand-dependent nuclear receptor interactor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently, in a ligand dependent manner, with a nuclear receptor protein.
0017098	name:Name:sulfonylurea receptor binding	name:Synonym:sulfonylurea receptor ligand	name:Synonym:sulphonylurea receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the sulfonylurea receptor, a regulatory subunit of the ATP-sensitive potassium ion channel.
0017162	name:Name:aryl hydrocarbon receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an aryl hydrocarbon receptor.
0030156	name:Name:benzodiazepine receptor binding	name:Synonym:benzodiazepine receptor ligand	name:Synonym:diazepam binding inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (PBR).
0030215	name:Name:semaphorin receptor binding	name:Synonym:plexin binding	name:Synonym:plexin ligand	name:Synonym:semaphorin receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with semaphorin receptors.
0030370	name:Name:intercellular adhesion molecule-3 receptor binding	name:Synonym:ICAM-3 receptor binding	name:Synonym:ICAM-3 receptor ligand	name:Synonym:intercellular adhesion molecule-3 receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with receptors for intercellular adhesion molecule-3 (ICAM-3), such as DC-SIGN and LFA-1.
0030971	name:Name:receptor tyrosine kinase binding	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase ligand binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a receptor that possesses protein tyrosine kinase activity.
0030987	name:Name:high molecular weight kininogen receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a high molecular weight kininogen receptor.
0033130	name:Name:acetylcholine receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an acetylcholine receptor.
0033612	name:Name:receptor serine/threonine kinase binding	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor protein serine/threonine kinase ligand binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a receptor that possesses protein serine/threonine kinase activity.
0034190	name:Name:apolipoprotein receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an apolipoprotein receptor.
0034987	name:Name:immunoglobulin receptor binding	name:Synonym:Fc receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one or more specific sites on an immunoglobulin receptor molecule.
0035254	name:Name:glutamate receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a glutamate receptor.
0035325	name:Name:Toll-like receptor binding	name:Synonym:TLR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Toll-like protein, a pattern recognition receptor that binds pattern motifs from a variety of microbial sources to initiate an innate immune response.
0042287	name:Name:MHC protein binding	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex binding	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with major histocompatibility complex molecules; a set of molecules displayed on cell surfaces that are responsible for lymphocyte recognition and antigen presentation.
0042608	name:Name:T cell receptor binding	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte receptor binding	name:Synonym:T-cell receptor binding	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte receptor binding	name:Synonym:TCR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a T cell receptor, the antigen-recognizing receptor on the surface of T cells.
0042609	name:Name:CD4 receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CD4, a receptor found on the surface of T cells, monocytes and macrophages.
0042610	name:Name:CD8 receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CD8, a receptor found on the surface of thymocytes and cytotoxic and suppressor T-lymphocytes.
0042614	name:Name:CD70 receptor binding	name:Synonym:CD27 receptor activity	name:Synonym:CD27L binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CD70, a receptor found on the surface of most activated B cells and some activated T cells.
0042615	name:Name:CD154 receptor binding	name:Synonym:CD40 receptor activity	name:Synonym:CD40L binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with CD154, a receptor found on the surface of some activated lymphocytes.
0042975	name:Name:peroxisome proliferator activated receptor binding	name:Synonym:PPAR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any of the peroxisome proliferator activated receptors, alpha, beta or gamma.
0043125	name:Name:ErbB-3 class receptor binding	name:Synonym:HER3 receptor binding	name:Synonym:Neu/ErbB-2 receptor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the protein-tyrosine kinase receptor ErbB-3/HER3.
0046703	name:Name:natural killer cell lectin-like receptor binding	name:Synonym:KLRC4 receptor binding	name:Synonym:NK cell lectin-like receptor binding	name:Synonym:NKG2D receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lectin-like natural killer cell receptor.
0046789	name:Name:host cell surface receptor binding	name:Synonym:cell surface antigen activity, host-interacting	name:Synonym:cell surface receptor ligand	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a receptor on the host cell surface.
0046875	name:Name:ephrin receptor binding	name:Synonym:Eph receptor binding	name:Synonym:ephrin	name:Synonym:GPI-linked ephrin	name:Synonym:transmembrane ephrin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an ephrin receptor.
0048018	name:Name:receptor agonist activity	name:Synonym:receptor ligand activity	info:Definition:Interacts with receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is increased.
0048019	name:Name:receptor antagonist activity	name:Synonym:receptor ligand activity	info:Definition:Interacts with receptors to reduce the action of another ligand, the agonist.
0048495	name:Name:Roundabout binding	name:Synonym:Roundabout receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the Roundabout (ROBO) receptor, a transmembrane receptor.
0050786	name:Name:RAGE receptor binding	name:Synonym:advanced glycation end-product receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the RAGE receptor, the receptor for advanced glycation end-products.
0050811	name:Name:GABA receptor binding	name:Synonym:4-aminobutanoate receptor binding	name:Synonym:4-aminobutyrate receptor binding	name:Synonym:diazepam binding inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate) receptor.
0050827	name:Name:toxin receptor binding	name:Synonym:channel-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:cytotoxin activity	name:Synonym:endotoxin activity	name:Synonym:enterotoxin activity	name:Synonym:exotoxin activity	name:Synonym:lipoprotein toxin	name:Synonym:neurotoxin activity	name:Synonym:pore-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:toxin activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a toxin receptor, a receptor for substances that cause injury to living organisms.
0051427	name:Name:hormone receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a receptor for hormones.
0070325	name:Name:lipoprotein particle receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipoprotein particle receptor.
0070851	name:Name:growth factor receptor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with a growth factor receptor.
0005483	name:Name:soluble NSF attachment protein activity	name:Synonym:SNAP	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with both N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein (NSF) and a cis-SNARE complex (i.e. a SNARE complex in which all proteins are associated with the same membrane) and increasing the ATPase activity of NSF, thereby allowing ATP hydrolysis by NSF to disassemble the cis-SNARE complex.
0005484	name:Name:SNAP receptor activity	name:Synonym:Q-SNARE activity	name:Synonym:R-SNARE activity	name:Synonym:SNAP-25	name:Synonym:SNARE	name:Synonym:t-SNARE activity	name:Synonym:v-SNARE activity	info:Definition:Acting as a marker to identify a membrane and interacting selectively with one or more SNAREs on another membrane to mediate membrane fusion.
0005516	name:Name:calmodulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with calmodulin, a calcium-binding protein with many roles, both in the calcium-bound and calcium-free states.
0005518	name:Name:collagen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with collagen, a group of fibrous proteins of very high tensile strength that form the main component of connective tissue in animals. Collagen is highly enriched in glycine (some regions are 33% glycine) and proline, occurring predominantly as 3-hydroxyproline (about 20%).
0070052	name:Name:collagen V binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a type V collagen.
0005521	name:Name:lamin binding	name:Synonym:lamin/chromatin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lamin; any of a group of intermediate-filament proteins that form the fibrous matrix on the inner surface of the nuclear envelope.
0005522	name:Name:profilin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with profilin, an actin-binding protein that forms a complex with G-actin and prevents it from polymerizing to form F-actin.
0008013	name:Name:beta-catenin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the beta subunit of the catenin complex.
0008022	name:Name:protein C-terminus binding	name:Synonym:C-terminal binding	name:Synonym:C-terminal end binding	name:Synonym:carboxy-terminal binding	name:Synonym:carboxy-terminus binding	name:Synonym:carboxyl-terminal binding	name:Synonym:carboxyl-terminus binding	name:Synonym:carboxylate-terminal binding	name:Synonym:carboxylate-terminus binding	name:Synonym:COOH-terminal binding	name:Synonym:COOH-terminus binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a protein C-terminus, the end of any peptide chain at which the 1-carboxy function of a constituent amino acid is not attached in peptide linkage to another amino-acid residue.
0008092	name:Name:cytoskeletal protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein component of any cytoskeleton (actin, microtubule, or intermediate filament cytoskeleton).
0003779	name:Name:actin binding	name:Synonym:membrane associated actin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with monomeric or multimeric forms of actin, including actin filaments.
0005519	name:Name:cytoskeletal regulatory protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein involved in modulating the reorganization of the cytoskeleton.
0005523	name:Name:tropomyosin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with tropomyosin, a protein associated with actin filaments both in cytoplasm and, in association with troponin, in the thin filament of striated muscle.
0008093	name:Name:cytoskeletal adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together a cytoskeletal protein and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0015631	name:Name:tubulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with monomeric or multimeric forms of tubulin, including microtubules.
0017022	name:Name:myosin binding	name:Synonym:myosin phosphatase myosin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of a myosin complex; myosins are any of a superfamily of molecular motor proteins that bind to actin and use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to generate force and movement along actin filaments.
0017166	name:Name:vinculin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with vinculin, a protein found in muscle, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells that binds actin and appears to mediate attachment of actin filaments to integral proteins of the plasma membrane.
0019894	name:Name:kinesin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and stoichiometrically with kinesin, a member of a superfamily of microtubule-based motor proteins that perform force-generating tasks such as organelle transport and chromosome segregation.
0030172	name:Name:troponin C binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with troponin C, the calcium-binding subunit of the troponin complex.
0030506	name:Name:ankyrin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ankyrin, a 200 kDa cytoskeletal protein that attaches other cytoskeletal proteins to integral membrane proteins.
0030507	name:Name:spectrin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with spectrin, a protein that is the major constituent of the erythrocyte cytoskeletal network. It associates with band 4.1 (see band protein) and actin to form the cytoskeletal superstructure of the erythrocyte plasma membrane. It is composed of nonhomologous chains, alpha and beta, which aggregate side-to-side in an antiparallel fashion to form dimers, tetramers, and higher polymers.
0031005	name:Name:filamin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a filamin, any member of a family of high molecular mass cytoskeletal proteins that crosslink actin filaments to form networks and stress fibers. Filamins contain an amino-terminal alpha-actinin-like actin binding domain, which is followed by a rod-domain composed of 4 to 24 100-residue repetitive segments including a carboxy-terminal dimerization domain.
0031013	name:Name:troponin I binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with troponin I, the inhibitory subunit of the troponin complex.
0031014	name:Name:troponin T binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with troponin T, the tropomyosin-binding subunit of the troponin complex.
0031432	name:Name:titin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with titin, any of a family of giant proteins found in striated and smooth muscle. In striated muscle, single titin molecules span half the sarcomere, with their N- and C-termini in the Z-disc and M-line, respectively.
0031433	name:Name:telethonin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with telethonin, a protein found in the Z disc of striated muscle and which is a substrate of the titin kinase.
0034452	name:Name:dynactin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of a dynactin complex; dynactin is a large protein complex that activates dynein-based motor activity.
0042805	name:Name:actinin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with actinin, any member of a family of proteins that crosslink F-actin.
0043411	name:Name:myopalladin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with myopalladin, a myofibrillar protein with titin-like Ig domains.
0048156	name:Name:tau protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with tau protein. tau is a microtubule-associated protein, implicated in Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome and ALS.
0051370	name:Name:ZASP binding	name:Synonym:Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ-motif protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ motif protein (ZASP). ZASP is a Z-band protein specifically expressed in heart and skeletal muscle. This protein contains N-terminal PDZ domain and C-terminal LIM domain.
0051373	name:Name:FATZ binding	name:Synonym:calsarcin binding	name:Synonym:filamin-, actinin- and telethonin-binding protein of the Z-disc of striated muscle	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a family of FATZ proteins, filamin-, actinin-, and telethonin-binding proteins of the Z-disc of striated muscle. FATZ proteins are located in the Z-disc of the sarcomere and are involved in a complex network of interactions with other Z-band components.
0051411	name:Name:ALP binding	name:Synonym:actinin-associated LIM protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently wih ALP, actinin-associated LIM protein of the Z band. ALP is a PDZ/LIM domain protein found in the Z band.
0051416	name:Name:myotilin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with myotilin, a structural component of the Z-discs in human skeletal and cardiac muscle. Its C-terminus contains two immunoglobulin-like domains and the unique N-terminal half has a serine-rich region, with numerous potential phosphorylation sites, and a stretch of hydrophobic amino acids. Myotilin forms homodimers and binds to alpha-actinin, F-actin, and filamin C.
0051419	name:Name:nebulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nebulin, a large protein (approximately 800kD) that is anchored at the Z-disc by its C-terminal region and spans the length of the thin filament, ending at the edge of the H-zone.
0051420	name:Name:nebulette binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nebulette, a 107 kDa protein associated with the I-Z-I complex of cardiac myofibrils. It shows a high degree of homology with skeletal muscle nebulin.
0008134	name:Name:transcription factor binding	name:Synonym:TF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a transcription factor, any protein required to initiate or regulate transcription.
0001025	name:Name:RNA polymerase III transcription factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase III transcription factor, any protein required to initiate or regulate transcription by RNA polymerase III.
0001085	name:Name:RNA polymerase II transcription factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase II transcription factor, any protein required to initiate or regulate transcription by RNA polymerase II.
0017025	name:Name:TBP-class protein binding	name:Synonym:TATA-binding protein binding	name:Synonym:TBP binding	name:Synonym:TBP-related factor (TRF) protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a member of the class of TATA-binding proteins (TBP), including any of the TBP-related factors (TRFs).
0030957	name:Name:Tat protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Tat, a viral transactivating regulatory protein from the human immunodeficiency virus, or the equivalent protein from another virus.
0033613	name:Name:activating transcription factor binding	name:Synonym:transcription activator binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an activating transcription factor, any protein whose activity is required to initiate or upregulate transcription.
0042809	name:Name:vitamin D receptor binding	name:Synonym:calciferol receptor binding	name:Synonym:VDR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the vitamin D receptor, a nuclear receptor that mediates the action of vitamin D by binding DNA and controlling the transcription of hormone-sensitive genes.
0042974	name:Name:retinoic acid receptor binding	name:Synonym:RAR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the retinoic acid receptor, a ligand-regulated transcription factor belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily.
0043425	name:Name:bHLH transcription factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any of the basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) superfamily of transcription factors, important regulatory components in transcriptional networks of many developmental pathways.
0046966	name:Name:thyroid hormone receptor binding	name:Synonym:ligand-dependent thyroid hormone receptor interactor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a thyroid hormone receptor.
0051059	name:Name:NF-kappaB binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with NF-kappaB, a transcription factor for eukaryotic RNA polymerase II promoters.
0051525	name:Name:NFAT protein binding	name:Synonym:NFAT binding	name:Synonym:nuclear factor of activated T cell protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) proteins, a family of transcription factors. NFAT proteins have crucial roles in the development and function of the immune system.
0070491	name:Name:repressing transcription factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a transcription repressor, any protein whose activity is required to prevent or downregulate transcription.
0008267	name:Name:poly-glutamine tract binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a polyglutamine tract, i.e. a series of consecutive glutamine residues, in a protein.
0010313	name:Name:phytochrome binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phytochrome.
0017147	name:Name:Wnt-protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Wnt-protein, a secreted growth factor involved in signaling.
0017170	name:Name:KU70 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Ku70, a protein involved in non-homologous DNA end joining.
0019838	name:Name:growth factor binding	name:Synonym:neurotrophin TRK receptor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any growth factor, proteins or polypeptides that stimulate a cell or organism to grow or proliferate.
0005520	name:Name:insulin-like growth factor binding	name:Synonym:IGF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an insulin-like growth factor, any member of a group of polypeptides that are structurally homologous to insulin and share many of its biological activities, but are immunologically distinct from it.
0017134	name:Name:fibroblast growth factor binding	name:Synonym:FGF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with fibroblast growth factor.
0019966	name:Name:interleukin-1 binding	name:Synonym:IL-1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-1.
0019969	name:Name:interleukin-10 binding	name:Synonym:IL-10 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-10.
0019970	name:Name:interleukin-11 binding	name:Synonym:IL-11 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-11.
0019976	name:Name:interleukin-2 binding	name:Synonym:IL-2 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-2.
0019978	name:Name:interleukin-3 binding	name:Synonym:IL-3 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-3.
0019979	name:Name:interleukin-4 binding	name:Synonym:IL-4 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-4.
0019980	name:Name:interleukin-5 binding	name:Synonym:IL-5 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-5.
0019981	name:Name:interleukin-6 binding	name:Synonym:IL-6 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-6.
0019982	name:Name:interleukin-7 binding	name:Synonym:IL-7 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-7.
0019983	name:Name:interleukin-9 binding	name:Synonym:IL-9 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-9.
0043121	name:Name:neurotrophin binding	name:Synonym:neurotrophin TRK receptor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with neurotrophin, any of a family of growth factors that block apoptosis in neurons and thus promote nerve growth.
0048407	name:Name:platelet-derived growth factor binding	name:Synonym:PDGF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with platelet-derived growth factor.
0048408	name:Name:epidermal growth factor binding	name:Synonym:EGF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with epidermal growth factor.
0050431	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta binding	name:Synonym:TGF-beta binding	name:Synonym:TGFbeta binding	name:Synonym:transforming growth factor beta ligand binding to type I receptor	name:Synonym:transforming growth factor beta ligand binding to type II receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with TGF-beta, transforming growth factor beta, a multifunctional peptide that controls proliferation, differentiation and other functions in many cell types.
0019899	name:Name:enzyme binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any enzyme.
0002020	name:Name:protease binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protease or peptidase.
0008179	name:Name:adenylate cyclase binding	name:Synonym:adenylyl cyclase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme adenylate cyclase.
0010180	name:Name:thioglucosidase binding	name:Synonym:myrosinase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme thioglucosidase.
0017033	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase I binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme DNA topoisomerase I.
0017151	name:Name:DEAD/H-box RNA helicase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme DEAD/H-box RNA helicase.
0019900	name:Name:kinase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a kinase, any enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group.
0019902	name:Name:phosphatase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any phosphatase.
0031624	name:Name:ubiquitin conjugating enzyme binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, any of the E2 proteins.
0031625	name:Name:ubiquitin protein ligase binding	name:Synonym:ubiquitin ligase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a ubiquitin protein ligase enzyme, any of the E3 proteins.
0031996	name:Name:thioesterase binding	name:Synonym:thiolesterase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any thioesterase enzyme.
0032145	name:Name:succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase binding	name:Synonym:succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase.
0032190	name:Name:acrosin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with acrosin, a protein that is found in the acrosomes of sperm and possesses protease and carbohydrate binding activities.
0033134	name:Name:ubiquitin activating enzyme binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a ubiquitin activating enzyme, any of the E1 proteins.
0035035	name:Name:histone acetyltransferase binding	name:Synonym:histone acetylase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme histone acetyltransferase.
0035226	name:Name:glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the catalytic subunit of glutamate-cysteine ligase.
0035375	name:Name:zymogen binding	name:Synonym:proenzyme binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a zymogen, an enzymatically inactive precursor of an enzyme that is often convertible to an active enzyme by proteolysis.
0035473	name:Name:lipase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any lipase.
0042826	name:Name:histone deacetylase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme histone deacetylase.
0043106	name:Name:GTP cyclohydrolase I binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme GTP cyclohydrolase I.
0043274	name:Name:phospholipase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any phospholipase, enzymes that catalyze of the hydrolysis of a glycerophospholipid.
0050998	name:Name:nitric-oxide synthase binding	name:Synonym:NOS binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the enzyme nitric-oxide synthase.
0051020	name:Name:GTPase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a GTPase, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of GTP.
0051117	name:Name:ATPase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an ATPase, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP.
0070063	name:Name:RNA polymerase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RNA polymerase molecule or complex.
0070182	name:Name:DNA polymerase binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a DNA polymerase.
0019904	name:Name:protein domain specific binding	name:Synonym:protein domain-specific binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a specific domain of a protein.
0017058	name:Name:FH1 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a FH1 domain of a protein, a proline-rich domain, usually located in front of a FH2 domain.
0017124	name:Name:SH3 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SH3 domain (Src homology 3) of a protein, small protein modules containing approximately 50 amino acid residues found in a great variety of intracellular or membrane-associated proteins.
0030165	name:Name:PDZ domain binding	name:Synonym:DHR-domain binding	name:Synonym:GLGF-domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a PDZ domain of a protein, a domain found in diverse signaling proteins.
0030274	name:Name:LIM domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a LIM domain (for Lin-11 Isl-1 Mec-3) of a protein, a domain with seven conserved cysteine residues and a histidine, that binds two zinc ions and acts as an interface for protein-protein interactions.
0030275	name:Name:LRR domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a LRR domain (leucine rich repeats) of a protein.
0030911	name:Name:TPR domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain of a protein, the consensus sequence of which is defined by a pattern of small and large hydrophobic amino acids and a structure composed of helices.
0031208	name:Name:POZ domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a POZ (poxvirus and zinc finger) domain of a protein, a protein-protein interaction domain found in many transcription factors.
0032089	name:Name:NACHT domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a NACHT (NAIP, CIITA, HET-E and TP1) domain. The NACHT domain consists of seven distinct conserved motifs, including an ATP/GTPase specific P-loop, a Mg(2+)-binding site and five more specific motifs.
0032090	name:Name:Pyrin domain binding	name:Synonym:DAPIN domain binding	name:Synonym:PAAD domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Pyrin (PAAD/DAPIN) domain, a protein-protein interaction domain that has the same fold as the Death domain.
0032093	name:Name:SAM domain binding	name:Synonym:Sterile Alpha Motif domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SAM (Sterile Alpha Motif) domain, which is a 70-amino acid protein sequence that participates in protein-protein, protein-lipid, and protein-RNA interactions and is conserved from lower to higher eukaryotes.
0032399	name:Name:HECT domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a HECT, 'Homologous to the E6-AP Carboxyl Terminus', domain of a protein.
0032427	name:Name:GBD domain binding	name:Synonym:Cdc42/Rac interactive binding motif binding	name:Synonym:CRIB motif binding	name:Synonym:P21-Rho-binding domain binding	name:Synonym:PMD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the GTPase protein binding domain (GDB) domain of a protein. The GBD is a short motif, including a minimum region of 16 amino acids, identified in proteins that bind to small GTPases such as Cdc42 and Rac.
0033149	name:Name:FFAT motif binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the FFAT motif, a short motif containing diphenylalanine in an acidic tract that targets proteins to the cytosolic surface of the ER and to the nuclear membrane by binding directly to members of the VAP (VAMP-associated protein) protein family.
0035500	name:Name:MH2 domain binding	name:Synonym:MAD homology 2 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the MH2 (MAD homology 2) domain of a protein. The MH2 domain is found at the carboxy terminus of MAD related proteins such as Smads. The MH2 domain mediates interaction with a wide variety of proteins and provides specificity and selectivity to Smad function and also is critical for mediating interactions in Smad oligomers.
0035501	name:Name:MH1 domain binding	name:Synonym:MAD homology 1 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the MH1 (MAD homology 1) domain of a protein. The MH1 domain is found at the amino terminus of MAD related proteins such as Smads and can mediate DNA binding in some proteins. Smads also use the MH1 domain to interact with some transcription factors.
0035851	name:Name:Krueppel-associated box domain binding	name:Synonym:KRAB domain binding	name:Synonym:Krueppel-associated box binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Krueppel-associated box (KRAB) domain of a protein. The approximately 75 amino acid KRAB domain is enriched in charged amino acids, and is found in the N-terminal regions of many zinc finger-containing transcription factors.
0035877	name:Name:death effector domain binding	name:Synonym:DED binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a DED domain (death effector domain) of a protein, a homotypic protein interaction module composed of a bundle of six alpha-helices that is related in structure to the death domain (DD).
0042169	name:Name:SH2 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SH2 domain (Src homology 2) of a protein, a protein domain of about 100 amino-acid residues and belonging to the alpha + beta domain class.
0042731	name:Name:PH domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a PH domain (pleckstrin homology) of a protein, a domain of about 100 residues that occurs in a wide range of proteins involved in intracellular signaling or as constituents of the cytoskeleton.
0043398	name:Name:HLH domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Helix Loop Helix, a domain of 40-50 residues that occurs in specific DNA-binding proteins that act as transcription factors. The domain is formed of two amphipathic helices joined by a variable length linker region that can form a loop and it mediates protein dimerization.
0044197	name:Name:Rel homology domain binding	name:Synonym:RHD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Rel Homology Domain (RHD) of a protein. The RHD is found in a family of eukaryotic transcription factors, which includes NF-kappaB, Dorsal, Relish and NFAT.
0044198	name:Name:zf-TRAF domain binding	name:Synonym:TRAF-type zinc finger domain binding	name:Synonym:zinc finger TRAF-type domain binding	name:Synonym:zinc-finger-TRAF domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a TRAF-type zinc finger domain of a protein.
0050682	name:Name:AF-2 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the AF-2 domain of a protein, a highly conserved ligand-dependent transactivation domain which is essential for receptor-mediated transcriptional activation.
0050683	name:Name:AF-1 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the AF-1 domain of a protein, a ligand-independent transactivation domain which is required for the full transcriptional activity of the receptor.
0050692	name:Name:DBD domain binding	name:Synonym:DNA binding domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the DBD, DNA binding domain, of a protein. The DNA binding domain of the vitamin D receptor, one of a family of receptors with the DBD, is split into three regions, the P, D and T boxes. Residues that are critical for target sequence selectivity form the P-box. The D-box contains residues that are important for homodimerization of class I nuclear receptors. The T-box is essential for both DNA-binding and transactivation of the VDR; this region may also be important for dimerization with RXR for class II nuclear receptors.
0050693	name:Name:LBD domain binding	name:Synonym:ligand binding domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the LBD, the ligand binding domain found in nuclear receptors. In general, the LBDs consist of three layers comprised of twelve alpha-helices and several beta-strands that are organized around a lipophilic ligand-binding pocket.
0050699	name:Name:WW domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a WW domain of a protein, a small module composed of 40 amino acids and plays a role in mediating protein-protein interactions via proline-rich regions.
0050700	name:Name:CARD domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CARD (N-terminal caspase recruitment) domain, a protein-protein interaction domain that belongs to the death domain-fold superfamily. These protein molecule families are similar in structure with each consisting of six or seven anti-parallel alpha-helices that form highly specific homophilic interactions between signaling partners. CARD exists in the N-terminal prodomains of several caspases and in apoptosis-regulatory proteins and mediates the assembly of CARD-containing proteins that participate in activation or suppression of CARD carrying members of the caspase family.
0050733	name:Name:RS domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an RS domain of a protein; RS domains are usually highly phosphorylated and characterized by the presence of arginine (R)/serine (S) dipeptides. The RS domain promotes protein-protein interactions and directs subcellular localization and, in certain situations, nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of individual SR proteins. They also play a role in splicing.
0051400	name:Name:BH domain binding	name:Synonym:Bcl-2 homology domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the Bcl-2 homology (BH) domain of a protein. Bcl-2-related proteins share homology in one to four conserved regions designated the Bcl-2 homology (BH) domains BH1, BH2, BH3 and BH4. These domains contribute at multiple levels to the function of these proteins in cell death and survival. Anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family have four BH domains (BH1-BH4). Pro-apoptotic members have fewer BH domains.
0051401	name:Name:CH domain binding	name:Synonym:calponin homology domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the calponin homology domain of a protein, a domain of 100 residues that occurs in signaling and cytoskeletal proteins.
0051425	name:Name:PTB domain binding	name:Synonym:phosphotyrosine-interacting domain binding	name:Synonym:PID binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain of a protein.
0055131	name:Name:C3HC4-type RING finger domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a C3HC4-type zinc finger domain of a protein. The C3HC4-type zinc finger is a variant of RING finger, is a cysteine-rich domain of 40 to 60 residues that coordinates two zinc ions, and has the consensus sequence: C-X2-C-X(9-39)-C-X(1-3)-H-X(2-3)-C-X2-C-X(4-48)-C-X2-C, where X is any amino acid. Many proteins containing a C3HC4-type RING finger play a key role in the ubiquitination pathway.
0070016	name:Name:armadillo repeat domain binding	name:Synonym:Arm repeat domain binding	name:Synonym:armadillo domain binding	name:Synonym:armadillo repeat binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the armadillo repeat domain of a protein, an approximately 40 amino acid long tandemly repeated sequence motif first identified in the Drosophila segment polarity protein armadillo. Arm-repeat proteins are involved in various processes, including intracellular signalling and cytoskeletal regulation.
0070080	name:Name:titin Z domain binding	name:Synonym:Z repeat domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the titin Z domain, which recognizes and binds to the C-terminal calmodulin-like domain of alpha-actinin-2 (Act-EF34), adopts a helical structure, and binds in a groove formed by the two planes between the helix pairs of Act-EF34.
0070087	name:Name:chromo shadow domain binding	name:Synonym:chromoshadow domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a chromo shadow domain, a protein domain that is distantly related, and found in association with, the chromo domain.
0070513	name:Name:death domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a death domain of a protein. The death domain (DD) is a homotypic protein interaction module composed of a bundle of six alpha-helices. DD bind each other forming oligomers. Some DD-containing proteins are involved in the regulation of apoptosis and inflammation through their activation of caspases and NF-kappaB.
0070742	name:Name:C2H2 zinc finger domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a C2H2-type zinc finger domain of a protein. The C2H2 zinc finger is the classical zinc finger domain, in which two conserved cysteines and histidines co-ordinate a zinc ion.
0070974	name:Name:POU domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a POU domain of a protein. The POU domain is a bipartite DNA binding domain composed of two subunits separated by a non-conserved region of 15-55 amino acids; it is found in several eukaryotic transcription factors.
0070975	name:Name:FHA domain binding	name:Synonym:Forkhead-associated domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a FHA domain of a protein. The FHA domain is a phosphopeptide recognition domain found in many regulatory proteins, and consists of approximately 80-100 amino acid residues folded into an 11-stranded beta sandwich.
0070976	name:Name:TIR domain binding	name:Synonym:Toll-Interleukin receptor domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Toll-Interleukin receptor (TIR) domain of a protein. The TIR domain is an intracellular 200 residue domain that is found in the Toll protein, the interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R), and MyD88; it contains three highly-conserved regions, and mediates protein-protein interactions between the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and signal-transduction components.
0070984	name:Name:SET domain binding	name:Synonym:SET binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SET domain of a protein. SET domains are named after three Drosophila proteins that contain this domain: Su(var), E(z) and trithorax. SET domains are associated with histone lysine methylation.
0071532	name:Name:ankyrin repeat binding	name:Synonym:ANK repeat binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an ankyrin repeat of a protein. Ankyrin repeats are tandemly repeated modules of about 33 amino acids; each repeat folds into a helix-loop-helix structure with a beta-hairpin/loop region projecting out from the helices at a 90-degree angle, and repeats stack to form an L-shaped structure.
0071535	name:Name:RING-like zinc finger domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a RING-like zinc finger domain domain of a protein. The RING-like domain is a zinc finger domain that is related to the C3HC4 RING finger domain.
0071551	name:Name:RIP homotypic interaction motif binding	name:Synonym:RHIM binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) of a protein. The RHIM is a 16-amino-acid motif found in some members, including RIP3, of a family of related kinases.
0071794	name:Name:CAP-Gly domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CAP-Gly domain of a protein. The CAP_Gly domain is a conserved, glycine-rich domain of about 42 residues found in some cytoskeleton-associated proteins, and features a novel protein fold containing three beta-sheets.
0071837	name:Name:HMG box domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an HMG box domain, a protein domain that consists of three helices in an irregular array. HMG-box domains are found in one or more copies in HMG-box proteins, which form a large, diverse family involved in the regulation of DNA-dependent processes such as transcription, replication, and strand repair, all of which require the bending and unwinding of chromatin.
0071906	name:Name:CRD domain binding	name:Synonym:context dependent regulatory domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a CRD (context dependent regulatory) domain, a domain of about 130 residues that is the most divergent region among the LEF/TCF proteins.
0071987	name:Name:WD40-repeat domain binding	name:Synonym:beta-transducin repeat domain binding	name:Synonym:WD domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a WD40 repeat domain of a protein. The WD40 repeat is a short structural motif of approximately 40 amino acids, often terminating in a tryptophan-aspartic acid (W-D) dipeptide. Several of these repeats are combined to form a type of protein domain called the WD domain.
0097016	name:Name:L27 domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a L27 domain of a protein. L27 is composed of conserved negatively charged amino acids and a conserved aromatic amino acid. L27 domains can assemble proteins involved in signaling and establishment and maintenance of cell polarity into complexes by interacting in a heterodimeric manner.
0019955	name:Name:cytokine binding	name:Synonym:IL binding	name:Synonym:interleukin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a cytokine, any of a group of proteins that function to control the survival, growth and differentiation of tissues and cells, and which have autocrine and paracrine activity.
0002113	name:Name:interleukin-33 binding	name:Synonym:IL-33 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-33.
0019956	name:Name:chemokine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a chemokine, any of a subgroup of cytokines which act primarily on hemopoietic cells in acute and inflammatory processes and other immunoregulatory functions.
0019961	name:Name:interferon binding	name:Synonym:IFN binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an interferon, a protein produced by the immune systems of many animals in response to a challenge by a foreign agent.
0019972	name:Name:interleukin-12 binding	name:Synonym:IL-12 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-12.
0019973	name:Name:interleukin-13 binding	name:Synonym:IL-13 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-13.
0019974	name:Name:interleukin-14 binding	name:Synonym:IL-14 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-14.
0019975	name:Name:interleukin-17 binding	name:Synonym:IL-17 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any member of the interleukin-17 family of cytokines.
0019977	name:Name:interleukin-21 binding	name:Synonym:IL-21 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-21.
0035718	name:Name:macrophage migration inhibitory factor binding	name:Synonym:MIF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the cytokine, macrophage migration inhibitory factor.
0042007	name:Name:interleukin-18 binding	name:Synonym:IL-18 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-18.
0042009	name:Name:interleukin-15 binding	name:Synonym:IL-15 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-15.
0042011	name:Name:interleukin-16 binding	name:Synonym:IL-16 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-16.
0042013	name:Name:interleukin-19 binding	name:Synonym:IL-19 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-19.
0042015	name:Name:interleukin-20 binding	name:Synonym:IL-20 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-20.
0042017	name:Name:interleukin-22 binding	name:Synonym:IL-22 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-22.
0042019	name:Name:interleukin-23 binding	name:Synonym:IL-23 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-23.
0042021	name:Name:granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor complex binding	name:Synonym:GM-CSF complex binding	name:Synonym:GMC-SF complex binding	name:Synonym:granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor complex.
0043120	name:Name:tumor necrosis factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with tumor necrosis factor, a proinflammatory cytokine produced by monocytes and macrophages.
0045510	name:Name:interleukin-24 binding	name:Synonym:IL-24 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-24.
0045511	name:Name:interleukin-25 binding	name:Synonym:IL-25 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-25.
0045512	name:Name:interleukin-26 binding	name:Synonym:IL-26 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-26.
0045513	name:Name:interleukin-27 binding	name:Synonym:IL-27 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-27.
0051916	name:Name:granulocyte colony-stimulating factor binding	name:Synonym:G-CSF binding	name:Synonym:granulocyte colony stimulating factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, G-CSF.
0070119	name:Name:ciliary neurotrophic factor binding	name:Synonym:CNTF binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the cytokine ciliary neurotrophic factor.
0070379	name:Name:high mobility group box 1 binding	name:Synonym:HMGB1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with high mobility group box 1 (HMBGB1).
0070746	name:Name:interleukin-35 binding	name:Synonym:IL-35 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with interleukin-35.
0030276	name:Name:clathrin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a clathrin heavy or light chain, the main components of the coat of coated vesicles and coated pits, and which also occurs in synaptic vesicles.
0032050	name:Name:clathrin heavy chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a clathrin heavy chain.
0032051	name:Name:clathrin light chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a clathrin light chain.
0035615	name:Name:clathrin adaptor activity	name:Synonym:clathrin-associated adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together clathrin and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0030332	name:Name:cyclin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cyclins, proteins whose levels in a cell varies markedly during the cell cycle, rising steadily until mitosis, then falling abruptly to zero. As cyclins reach a threshold level, they are thought to drive cells into G2 phase and thus to mitosis.
0030492	name:Name:hemoglobin binding	name:Synonym:globin binding	name:Synonym:haemoglobin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with hemoglobin, an oxygen carrying, conjugated protein containing four heme groups and globin.
0031721	name:Name:hemoglobin alpha binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a hemoglobin alpha chain.
0031722	name:Name:hemoglobin beta binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a hemoglobin beta chain.
0030674	name:Name:protein binding, bridging	name:Synonym:protein-protein adaptor	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together two or more protein molecules, or a protein and another macromolecule or complex, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way.
0005068	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase adaptor activity	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase adaptor protein activity	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase docking protein activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together a transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0005070	name:Name:SH3/SH2 adaptor activity	name:Synonym:SH3/SH2 adaptor protein activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and simultaneously with one or more signal transduction molecules, usually acting as a scaffold to bring these molecules into close proximity either using their own SH2/SH3 domains (e.g. Grb2) or those of their target molecules (e.g. SAM68).
0005091	name:Name:guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together a guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0008269	name:Name:JAK pathway signal transduction adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together two molecules of the JAK signal transduction pathway, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0017107	name:Name:anion exchanger adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together an anion exchanger and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0019895	name:Name:kinesin-associated mitochondrial adaptor activity	info:Definition:The activity of linking kinesins, cytoplasmic proteins responsible for moving vesicles and organelles towards the distal end of microtubules, to mitochondria.
0035656	name:Name:kinesin-associated melanosomal adaptor activity	name:Synonym:kinesin-melanosome adaptor activity	info:Definition:The activity of linking kinesins, cytoplasmic proteins responsible for moving vesicles and organelles towards the distal end of microtubules, to melanosomes.
0097020	name:Name:COPII adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together the COPII vesicle proteins and one or more other molecules, permitting them to function in a coordinated way.
0030742	name:Name:GTP-dependent protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules) using energy from the hydrolysis of GTP.
0030881	name:Name:beta-2-microglobulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with beta-2-microglobulin.
0030984	name:Name:kininogen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a kininogen, any of a group of plasma proteins that are kinin precursors.
0030985	name:Name:high molecular weight kininogen binding	name:Synonym:HK binding	name:Synonym:HMW kininogen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a kininogen of high molecular mass.
0030986	name:Name:low molecular weight kininogen binding	name:Synonym:LK binding	name:Synonym:LMW kininogen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a kininogen of low molecular mass.
0031072	name:Name:heat shock protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectvely with a heat shock protein, any protein synthesized or activated in response to heat shock.
0030544	name:Name:Hsp70 protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Hsp70 proteins, any of a group of heat shock proteins around 70kDa in size.
0051008	name:Name:Hsp27 protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Hsp27 proteins, a lightweight heat shock protein.
0051879	name:Name:Hsp90 protein binding	name:Synonym:Hsp90 binding	name:Synonym:Hsp90 class protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with Hsp90 proteins, any of a group of heat shock proteins around 90kDa in size.
0031249	name:Name:denatured protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with denatured proteins.
0031369	name:Name:translation initiation factor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a translation initiation factor, any polypeptide factor involved in the initiation of ribosome-mediated translation.
0008190	name:Name:eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding	name:Synonym:eIF4E binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with eukaryotic initiation factor 4E, a polypeptide factor involved in the initiation of ribosome-mediated translation.
0031370	name:Name:eukaryotic initiation factor 4G binding	name:Synonym:eIF4G binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with eukaryotic initiation factor 4G, a polypeptide factor involved in the initiation of ribosome-mediated translation.
0071074	name:Name:eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2, a protein complex involved in the initiation of ribosome-mediated translation.
0031423	name:Name:hexon binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a hexon, the major protein component of the icosahedral capsid of an adenovirus.
0031681	name:Name:G-protein beta-subunit binding	name:Synonym:G-beta protein subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a G-protein beta subunit.
0031682	name:Name:G-protein gamma-subunit binding	name:Synonym:G-gamma protein subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a G-protein gamma subunit.
0031720	name:Name:haptoglobin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a haptoglobin, any alpha2 globulin of blood plasma that can combine with free oxyhemoglobin to form a stable complex.
0032182	name:Name:small conjugating protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a small conjugating protein such as ubiquitin or a ubiquitin-like protein.
0032183	name:Name:SUMO binding	name:Synonym:Smt3 binding	name:Synonym:Smt3 monomer binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the small ubiquitin-like protein SUMO.
0043130	name:Name:ubiquitin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and non-covalently with ubiquitin, a protein that when covalently bound to other cellular proteins marks them for proteolytic degradation.
0032403	name:Name:protein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules).
0010997	name:Name:anaphase-promoting complex binding	name:Synonym:APC binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an anaphase-promoting complex. A ubiquitin ligase complex that degrades mitotic cyclins and anaphase inhibitory protein, thereby triggering sister chromatid separation and exit from mitosis.
0019215	name:Name:intermediate filament binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an intermediate filament, a distinct elongated structure, characteristically 10 nm in diameter, that occurs in the cytoplasm of higher eukaryotic cells. Intermediate filaments form a fibrous system, composed of chemically heterogeneous subunits and involved in mechanically integrating the various components of the cytoplasmic space.
0019865	name:Name:immunoglobulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an immunoglobulin.
0031683	name:Name:G-protein beta/gamma-subunit complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a complex of G-protein beta/gamma subunits.
0032404	name:Name:mismatch repair complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a mismatch repair complex.
0032795	name:Name:heterotrimeric G-protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a heterotrimeric G-protein.
0034710	name:Name:inhibin complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an inhibin complex, a dimer of one inhibin-alpha subunit and one inhibin-beta subunit.
0035612	name:Name:AP-2 adaptor complex binding	name:Synonym:AP-2 clathrin adaptor complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the AP-2 adaptor complex. The AP-2 adaptor complex is a heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of alpha, beta2, mu2 and sigma2 subunits and links clathrin to the membrane surface of a vesicle. In at least humans, the AP-2 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different alpha genes (alphaA and alphaC).
0035650	name:Name:AP-1 adaptor complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the AP-1 adaptor complex. The AP-1 adaptor complex is a heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of beta1, gamma, mu1 and sigma1 subunits and links clathrin to the membrane surface of a vesicle. In at least humans, the AP-1 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different genes (gamma1 and gamma2, mu1A and mu1B, and sigma1A, sigma1B and sigma1C).
0035651	name:Name:AP-3 adaptor complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the AP-3 adaptor complex. The AP-3 adaptor complex is a heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of beta3, delta, mu3 and sigma3 subunits and is found associated with endosomal membranes. In at least humans, the AP-3 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different genes (beta3A and beta3B, mu3A and mu3B, and sigma3A and sigma3B).
0048185	name:Name:activin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with activin, a dimer of inhibin-beta subunits.
0070051	name:Name:fibrinogen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with fibrinogen, a highly soluble hexameric glycoprotein complex that is found in blood plasma and is converted to fibrin by thrombin in the coagulation cascade.
0070628	name:Name:proteasome binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a proteasome, a large multisubunit protein complex that catalyzes protein degradation.
0070840	name:Name:dynein complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a dynein complex, a protein complex that contains two or three dynein heavy chains and several light chains, and has microtubule motor activity.
0071933	name:Name:Arp2/3 complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an Arp2/3 complex, a protein complex that contains two actin-related proteins, Arp2 and Arp3, and five novel proteins (ARPC1-5).
0032767	name:Name:copper-dependent protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules), in the presence of copper.
0032794	name:Name:GTPase activating protein binding	name:Synonym:GAP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a GTPase activating protein.
0034185	name:Name:apolipoprotein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an apolipoprotein, the protein component of a lipoprotein complex.
0034186	name:Name:apolipoprotein A-I binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with apolipoprotein A-I.
0034187	name:Name:apolipoprotein E binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with apolipoprotein E.
0034711	name:Name:inhibin binding	name:Synonym:inhibin monomer binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an inhibin monomer, any of the polypeptides that combine to form activin and inhibin dimers.
0034712	name:Name:inhibin alpha binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inhibin alpha.
0048186	name:Name:inhibin beta-A binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inhibin beta-A.
0048187	name:Name:inhibin beta-B binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inhibin beta-B.
0042043	name:Name:neurexin family protein binding	name:Synonym:neuroligin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with neurexins, synaptic cell surface proteins related to latrotoxin receptor, laminin and agrin. Neurexins act as cell recognition molecules at nerve terminals.
0042153	name:Name:RPTP-like protein binding	name:Synonym:receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase-like protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with proteins with similar structure/function to receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases.
0042393	name:Name:histone binding	name:Synonym:histone-specific chaperone activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a histone, any of a group of water-soluble proteins found in association with the DNA of plant and animal chromosomes. They are involved in the condensation and coiling of chromosomes during cell division and have also been implicated in nonspecific suppression of gene activity.
0035064	name:Name:methylated histone residue binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a methylated residue on a histone protein. Histones are any of a group of water-soluble proteins found in association with the DNA of plant and animal chromosomes.
0070577	name:Name:histone acetyl-lysine binding	name:Synonym:acetylated histone residue binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an acetylated lysine residue within a histone.
0042802	name:Name:identical protein binding	name:Synonym:isoform-specific homophilic binding	name:Synonym:protein homopolymerization	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an identical protein or proteins.
0042803	name:Name:protein homodimerization activity	name:Synonym:dimerization activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an identical protein to form a homodimer.
0042980	name:Name:cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator binding	name:Synonym:CFTR binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR) protein.
0042988	name:Name:X11-like protein binding	name:Synonym:X11L binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with X11-like protein, a neuron-specific adaptor protein.
0043008	name:Name:ATP-dependent protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules) using energy from the hydrolysis of ATP.
0043221	name:Name:SMC protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein from the structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) family, a group of chromosomal ATPases with a role in mitotic chromosome organization.
0043236	name:Name:laminin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with laminins, glycoproteins that are major constituents of the basement membrane of cells.
0043237	name:Name:laminin-1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with laminin-1, a glycoprotein trimer with the subunit composition alpha1, beta1, gamma1.
0043238	name:Name:laminin-2 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with laminin-2, a glycoprotein trimer with the subunit composition alpha2, beta1, gamma 1.
0043239	name:Name:laminin-4 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with laminin-4, a glycoprotein trimer with the subunit composition alpha2, beta2, gamma 1.
0043495	name:Name:protein anchor	name:Synonym:anchoring	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with both a protein or protein complex and a membrane, in order to maintain the localization of the protein at a specific location on the membrane.
0043532	name:Name:angiostatin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with angiostatin, a proteolytic product of plasminogen or plasmin containing at least one intact kringle domain, and which is an inhibitor of angiogenesis.
0043560	name:Name:insulin receptor substrate binding	name:Synonym:insulin receptor substrate [protein] binding	name:Synonym:IRS [protein] binding	name:Synonym:IRS binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any of the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins, adaptor proteins that bind to the transphosphorylated insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors, are themselves phosphorylated and in turn recruit SH2 domain-containing signaling molecules to form a productive signaling complex.
0043621	name:Name:protein self-association	name:Synonym:intramolecular protein binding	name:Synonym:protein self association	name:Synonym:protein self binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a domain within the same polypeptide.
0032840	name:Name:intramolecular proline-rich ligand binding	name:Synonym:intramolecular proline-rich region binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a proline-rich region within the same polypeptide.
0044183	name:Name:protein binding involved in protein folding	name:Synonym:chaperone activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules) that contributes to the process of protein folding.
0044325	name:Name:ion channel binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one or more specific sites on an ion channel, a protein complex that spans a membrane and forms a water-filled channel across the phospholipid bilayer allowing selective ion transport down its electrochemical gradient.
0045152	name:Name:antisigma factor binding	name:Synonym:antisigma factor antagonist activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an antisigma factor, a factor which inhibits the ability of the sigma factor to function as a transcriptional initiator.
0045294	name:Name:alpha-catenin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the alpha subunit of the catenin complex.
0045295	name:Name:gamma-catenin binding	name:Synonym:plakoglobin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the gamma subunit of the catenin complex.
0045502	name:Name:dynein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with dynein, the multisubunit protein complex that is associated with microtubules.
0045503	name:Name:dynein light chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a light chain of the dynein complex.
0045504	name:Name:dynein heavy chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a heavy chain of the dynein complex.
0045505	name:Name:dynein intermediate chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an intermediate chain of the dynein complex.
0051959	name:Name:dynein light intermediate chain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a light intermediate chain of the dynein complex.
0045545	name:Name:syndecan binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with syndecan, an integral membrane proteoglycan (250-300 kDa) associated largely with epithelial cells.
0045569	name:Name:TRAIL binding	name:Synonym:Apo-2L binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand), a member of the tumor necrosis factor ligand family that rapidly induces apoptosis in a variety of transformed cell lines.
0046332	name:Name:SMAD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a SMAD signaling protein.
0070410	name:Name:co-SMAD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a common mediator SMAD signaling protein.
0070411	name:Name:I-SMAD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an inhibitory SMAD signaling protein.
0070412	name:Name:R-SMAD binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a receptor-regulated SMAD signaling protein.
0046977	name:Name:TAP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with TAP protein, transporter associated with antigen processing protein. TAP protein is a heterodimeric peptide transporter consisting of the subunits TAP1 and TAP2.
0046978	name:Name:TAP1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the TAP1 subunit of TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing) protein.
0046979	name:Name:TAP2 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the TAP2 subunit of TAP (transporter associated with antigen processing) protein.
0046980	name:Name:tapasin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with tapasin, a member of the MHC class I loading complex which bridges the TAP peptide transporter to class I molecules.
0046983	name:Name:protein dimerization activity	info:Definition:The formation of a protein dimer, a macromolecular structure consists of two noncovalently associated identical or nonidentical subunits.
0046982	name:Name:protein heterodimerization activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nonidentical protein to form a heterodimer.
0047485	name:Name:protein N-terminus binding	name:Synonym:amino-terminal binding	name:Synonym:amino-terminus binding	name:Synonym:N-terminal binding	name:Synonym:N-terminal end binding	name:Synonym:NH2-terminal binding	name:Synonym:NH2-terminus binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a protein N-terminus, the end of any peptide chain at which the 2-amino (or 2-imino) function of a constituent amino acid is not attached in peptide linkage to another amino-acid residue.
0031997	name:Name:N-terminal myristoylation domain binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the N-terminus of a protein that has the potential to be, or has been, modified by N-terminal myristoylation. Binding affinity is typically altered by myristoylation; for example, N-terminal myristoylation of HIV Nef increases its affinity for calmodulin.
0048154	name:Name:S100 beta binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with S100 beta protein. S100 is a small calcium and zinc binding protein produced in astrocytes that is implicated in Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome and ALS.
0048155	name:Name:S100 alpha binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with S100 alpha protein. S100 is a small calcium and zinc binding protein produced in astrocytes that is implicated in Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome and ALS.
0048184	name:Name:follistatin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the peptide hormone follistatin.
0048306	name:Name:calcium-dependent protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules), in the presence of calcium.
0050839	name:Name:cell adhesion molecule binding	name:Synonym:adhesive extracellular matrix constituent	name:Synonym:CAM binding	name:Synonym:cell adhesion molecule activity	name:Synonym:cell adhesion receptor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a cell adhesion molecule.
0045296	name:Name:cadherin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cadherin, a type I membrane protein involved in cell adhesion.
0051018	name:Name:protein kinase A binding	name:Synonym:PKA binding	name:Synonym:protein kinase A anchoring activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any subunit of protein kinase A.
0034236	name:Name:protein kinase A catalytic subunit binding	name:Synonym:PKA catalytic subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one or both of the catalytic subunits of protein kinase A.
0034237	name:Name:protein kinase A regulatory subunit binding	name:Synonym:PKA regulatory subunit binding	name:Synonym:protein kinase A anchoring activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with one or both of the regulatory subunits of protein kinase A.
0051021	name:Name:GDP-dissociation inhibitor binding	name:Synonym:GDI binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a GDP-dissociation inhibitor protein.
0051022	name:Name:Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor binding	name:Synonym:Rho GDI binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor protein.
0051082	name:Name:unfolded protein binding	name:Synonym:binding unfolded ER proteins	name:Synonym:chaperone activity	name:Synonym:fimbrium-specific chaperone activity	name:Synonym:glycoprotein-specific chaperone activity	name:Synonym:histone-specific chaperone activity	name:Synonym:ribosomal chaperone activity	name:Synonym:tubulin-specific chaperone activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an unfolded protein.
0051087	name:Name:chaperone binding	name:Synonym:chaperone protein binding	name:Synonym:co-chaperone activity	name:Synonym:co-chaperonin activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a chaperone protein, a class of proteins that bind to nascent or unfolded polypeptides and ensure correct folding or transport.
0051219	name:Name:phosphoprotein binding	name:Synonym:phosphorylated protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a phosphorylated protein.
0045309	name:Name:protein phosphorylated amino acid binding	name:Synonym:phosphoprotein amino acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a phosphorylated amino acid residue within a protein.
0051787	name:Name:misfolded protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a misfolded protein.
0055100	name:Name:adiponectin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with adiponectin, a protein hormone produced by adipose tissue that modulates a number of metabolic processes, including glucose regulation and fatty acid catabolism.
0070064	name:Name:proline-rich region binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a proline-rich region, i.e. a region that contains a high proportion of proline residues, in a protein.
0070097	name:Name:delta-catenin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the delta subunit of the catenin complex.
0070215	name:Name:MDM2 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any isoform of the MDM2 protein, a negative regulator of p53.
0070216	name:Name:MDM4 binding	name:Synonym:MDMX binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any isoform of the MDM4 protein, a negative regulator of p53.
0070678	name:Name:preprotein binding	name:Synonym:unprocessed protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a preprotein, the unprocessed form of a protein destined to undergo co- or post-translational processing.
0070866	name:Name:sterol-dependent protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any protein or protein complex (a complex of two or more proteins that may include other nonprotein molecules) in the presence of sterols.
0071253	name:Name:connexin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a connexin, any of a group of related proteins that assemble to form gap junctions.
0071889	name:Name:14-3-3 protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 14-3-3 protein. A 14-3-3 protein is any of a large family of approximately 30kDa acidic proteins which exist primarily as homo- and heterodimers within all eukaryotic cells, and have been implicated in the modulation of distinct biological processes by binding to specific phosphorylated sites on diverse target proteins, thereby forcing conformational changes or influencing interactions between their targets and other molecules. Each 14-3-3 protein sequence can be roughly divided into three sections: a divergent amino terminus, the conserved core region and a divergent carboxyl terminus. The conserved middle core region of the 14-3-3s encodes an amphipathic groove that forms the main functional domain, a cradle for interacting with client proteins.
0097108	name:Name:hedgehog family protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a member of the hedgehog protein family, signaling proteins involved in development.
0097109	name:Name:neuroligin family protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a member of the neuroligin protein family, neuronal cell surface proteins that mediate synapse formation.
0097110	name:Name:scaffold protein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a scaffold protein. Scaffold proteins are crucial regulators of many key signaling pathways. Although not strictly defined in function, they are known to interact and/or bind with multiple members of a signaling pathway, tethering them into complexes.
0005549	name:Name:odorant binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an odorant, any substance capable of stimulating the sense of smell.
0005550	name:Name:pheromone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pheromone, a substance, or characteristic mixture of substances, that is secreted and released by an organism and detected by a second organism of the same or a closely related species, in which it causes a specific reaction, such as a definite behavioral reaction or a developmental process.
0008144	name:Name:drug binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a drug, any naturally occurring or synthetic substance, other than a nutrient, that, when administered or applied to an organism, affects the structure or functioning of the organism; in particular, any such substance used in the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease.
0005527	name:Name:macrolide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a macrolide, any of a large group of structurally related antibiotics produced by Streptomyces species.
0005528	name:Name:FK506 binding	name:Synonym:FK506-sensitive peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the immunosuppressant FK506.
0008145	name:Name:phenylalkylamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phenylalkylamine or any of its derivatives.
0008658	name:Name:penicillin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with penicillin, any antibiotic that contains the condensed beta-lactamthiazolidine ring system.
0010013	name:Name:N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid, an auxin transport inhibitor.
0016018	name:Name:cyclosporin A binding	name:Synonym:cyclophilin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cyclosporin A, a cyclic undecapeptide that contains several N-methylated and unusual amino acids.
0016596	name:Name:thienylcyclohexylpiperidine binding	name:Synonym:TCP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thienylcyclohexylpiperidine.
0019811	name:Name:cocaine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cocaine (2-beta-carbomethoxy-3-beta-benzoxytropane), an alkaloid obtained from dried leaves of the South American shrub Erythroxylon coca or by chemical synthesis.
0050809	name:Name:diazepam binding	name:Synonym:diazepam binding inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:Valium binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with diazepam, one of the most widely used benzodiazepine drugs. It is used as an anti-anxiety-hypnotic agent and has the proprietary name Valium.
0008289	name:Name:lipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipid.
0005496	name:Name:steroid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a steroid, any of a large group of substances that have in common a ring system based on 1,2-cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene.
0005497	name:Name:androgen binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any androgen, male sex hormones.
0005499	name:Name:vitamin D binding	name:Synonym:calciferol binding	name:Synonym:cholecalciferol binding	name:Synonym:ergocalciferol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with vitamin D, any of a group of related, fat-soluble compounds that are derived from delta-5,7 steroids and play a central role in calcium metabolism. Specific forms of vitamin D include calciferol (ergocalciferol; vitamin D2) and cholecalciferol (calciol; vitamin D3).
0032052	name:Name:bile acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with bile acids, any of a group of steroid carboxylic acids occurring in bile.
0032934	name:Name:sterol binding	name:Synonym:sterol carrier activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a sterol, any steroid containing a hydroxy group in the 3 position, closely related to cholestan-3-ol.
0035100	name:Name:ecdysone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone). Ecdysone is an ecdysteroid produced by the prothoracic glands of immature insects and the ovaries of adult females, which stimulates growth and molting.
0005504	name:Name:fatty acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with fatty acids, aliphatic monocarboxylic acids liberated from naturally occurring fats and oils by hydrolysis.
0000062	name:Name:fatty-acyl-CoA binding	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA or acyl binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with acyl-CoA, any derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is in thiolester linkage with a fatty acyl group.
0035727	name:Name:lysophosphatidic acid binding	name:Synonym:LPA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a phospholipid derivative that acts as a potent mitogen due to its activation of high-affinity G-protein-coupled receptors.
0050542	name:Name:icosanoid binding	name:Synonym:eicosanoid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with icosanoids, any C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids or their derivatives, including the leukotrienes and the prostanoids.
0070538	name:Name:oleic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with oleic acid, the 18-carbon monounsaturated fatty acid (9Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid.
0070539	name:Name:linoleic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with linoleic acid, the 18-carbon unsaturated fatty acid (9Z,12Z)-octadeca-9,12-dienoic acid.
0070540	name:Name:stearic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with stearic acid, the 18-carbon saturated fatty acid octadecanoic acid.
0005543	name:Name:phospholipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phospholipids, a class of lipids containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
0001786	name:Name:phosphatidylserine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phosphatidylserine, a class of glycophospholipids in which a phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of L-serine.
0005544	name:Name:calcium-dependent phospholipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phospholipids, a class of lipids containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester, in the presence of calcium.
0008429	name:Name:phosphatidylethanolamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phosphatidylethanolamine, any of a class of glycerophospholipids in which a phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of ethanolamine.
0031210	name:Name:phosphatidylcholine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phosphatidylcholine, a class of glycophospholipids in which a phosphatidyl group is esterified to the hydroxyl group of choline.
0035091	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol binding	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any inositol-containing glycerophospholipid, i.e. phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) and its phosphorylated derivatives.
0070300	name:Name:phosphatidic acid binding	name:Synonym:phosphatidate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phosphatidic acid, any of a class of glycerol phosphate in which both the remaining hydroxyl groups of the glycerol moiety are esterified with fatty acids.
0017129	name:Name:triglyceride binding	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any triester of glycerol.
0019840	name:Name:isoprenoid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any isoprenoid compound, isoprene (2-methylbuta-1,3-diene) or compounds containing or derived from linked isoprene (3-methyl-2-butenylene) residues.
0005500	name:Name:juvenile hormone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with juvenile hormone, the three sesquiterpenoid derivatives that function to maintain the larval state of insects at molting and that may be required for other processes, e.g. oogenesis.
0005501	name:Name:retinoid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with retinoids, any member of a class of isoprenoids that contain or are derived from four prenyl groups linked head-to-tail. Retinoids include retinol and retinal and structurally similar natural derivatives or synthetic compounds, but need not have vitamin A activity.
0010331	name:Name:gibberellin binding	name:Synonym:gibberellic acid receptor	name:Synonym:gibberellin receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with gibberellins, plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0010427	name:Name:abscisic acid binding	name:Synonym:ABA binding	name:Synonym:abscisate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with abscisic acid, plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0051738	name:Name:xanthophyll binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with xanthophylls, any of several neutral yellow to orange carotenoid pigments containing oxygen.
0019992	name:Name:diacylglycerol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with diacylglycerol, a diester of glycerol and two fatty acids.
0046625	name:Name:sphingolipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with sphingolipids, a class of lipids containing the long-chain amine diol sphingosine or a closely related base (a sphingoid).
0043208	name:Name:glycosphingolipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glycosphingolipid, a compound with residues of sphingoid and at least one monosaccharide.
0097001	name:Name:ceramide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any ceramide, a class of lipids that is composed of sphingosine linked to a fatty acid. Ceramides are a major component of cell membranes.
0051861	name:Name:glycolipid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a glycolipid, any compound containing one or more monosaccharide residues bound by a glycosidic linkage to a hydrophobic group such as an acylglycerol, a sphingoid, a ceramide (N-acylsphingoid) or a prenyl phosphate.
0008430	name:Name:selenium binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with selenium (Se).
0015643	name:Name:toxin binding	name:Synonym:antitoxin activity	name:Synonym:lipoprotein antitoxin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a toxin, a poisonous substance that causes damage to biological systems. Toxins are differentiated from simple chemical poisons and vegetable alkaloids by their high molecular weight and antigenicity (they elicit an antibody response).
0019825	name:Name:oxygen binding	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450	name:Synonym:cytochrome P450 activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with oxygen (O2).
0019826	name:Name:oxygen sensor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with and responding, e.g. by conformational change, to changes in the cellular level of oxygen (O2).
0019842	name:Name:vitamin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a vitamin, one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0005542	name:Name:folic acid binding	name:Synonym:folate binding	name:Synonym:vitamin B9 binding	name:Synonym:vitamin M binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with folic acid, pteroylglutamic acid. Folic acid is widely distributed as a member of the vitamin B complex and is essential for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidines.
0008431	name:Name:vitamin E binding	name:Synonym:alpha-tocopherol binding	name:Synonym:tocopherol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with vitamin E, tocopherol, which includes a series of eight structurally similar compounds. Alpha-tocopherol is the most active form in humans and is a powerful biological antioxidant.
0009374	name:Name:biotin binding	name:Synonym:vitamin B7 binding	name:Synonym:vitamin H binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with biotin (cis-tetrahydro-2-oxothieno(3,4-d)imidazoline-4-valeric acid), the (+) enantiomer of which is very widely distributed in cells and serves as a carrier in a number of enzymatic beta-carboxylation reactions.
0016918	name:Name:retinal binding	name:Synonym:blue-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:green-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:long-wave-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:opsin	name:Synonym:red-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:retinaldehyde binding	name:Synonym:short-wave-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:UV-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:violet-sensitive opsin	name:Synonym:vitamin A binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with retinal, one of the forms of vitamin A. Retinal plays an important role in the visual process in most vertebrates, combining with opsins to form visual pigments in the retina.
0005502	name:Name:11-cis retinal binding	name:Synonym:11-cis retinaldehyde binding	name:Synonym:11-cis-retinal binding	name:Synonym:vitamin A binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 11-cis retinal, an isomer of retinal that plays an important role in the visual process in most vertebrates. 11-cis retinal combines with opsin in the rods (scotopsin) to form rhodopsin or visual purple. Retinal is one of the three compounds that makes up vitamin A.
0005503	name:Name:all-trans retinal binding	name:Synonym:all-trans retinaldehyde binding	name:Synonym:trans retinal binding	name:Synonym:visual yellow binding	name:Synonym:vitamin A binding	name:Synonym:xanthopsin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with all-trans retinal, a compound that plays an important role in the visual process in most vertebrates. All-trans retinal (trans r., visual yellow) results from the bleaching of rhodopsin by light, in which the 11-cis form is converted to the all-trans form. Retinal is one of the forms of vitamin A.
0019841	name:Name:retinol binding	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 alcohol binding	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with retinol, vitamin A1, 2,6,6-trimethyl-1-(9'-hydroxy-3',7'-dimethylnona-1',3',5',7'-tetraenyl)cyclohex-1-ene, one of the three components that makes up vitamin A. Retinol is an intermediate in the vision cycle and it also plays a role in growth and differentiation.
0030975	name:Name:thiamine binding	name:Synonym:thiamin binding	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thiamine (vitamin B1), a water soluble vitamin present in fresh vegetables and meats, especially liver.
0030976	name:Name:thiamine pyrophosphate binding	name:Synonym:aneurine pyrophosphate binding	name:Synonym:cocarboxylase binding	name:Synonym:diphosphothiamin binding	name:Synonym:thiamin pyrophosphate binding	name:Synonym:TPP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thiamine pyrophosphate, the diphosphoric ester of thiamine. Acts as a coenzyme of several (de)carboxylases, transketolases, and alpha-oxoacid dehydrogenases.
0031177	name:Name:phosphopantetheine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively with phosphopantetheine, the vitamin pantetheine 4'-(dihydrogen phosphate).
0031418	name:Name:L-ascorbic acid binding	name:Synonym:L-ascorbate binding	name:Synonym:vitamin C binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with L-ascorbic acid, (2R)-2-[(1S)-1,2-dihydroxyethyl]-4-hydroxy-5-oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-olate; L-ascorbic acid is vitamin C and has co-factor and anti-oxidant activities in many species.
0031419	name:Name:cobalamin binding	name:Synonym:vitamin B12 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cobalamin (vitamin B12), a water-soluble vitamin characterized by possession of a corrin nucleus containing a cobalt atom.
0070279	name:Name:vitamin B6 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any of the vitamin B6 compounds: pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine and the active form, pyridoxal phosphate.
0030170	name:Name:pyridoxal phosphate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyridoxal 5' phosphate, 3-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methyl4-pyridine carboxaldehyde 5' phosphate, the biologically active form of vitamin B6.
0070280	name:Name:pyridoxal binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyridoxal, 3-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyridine-4-carbaldehyde, a form of vitamin B6.
0070281	name:Name:pyridoxamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyridoxamine, 4-(aminomethyl)-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyridin-3-ol, a form of vitamin B6.
0070282	name:Name:pyridoxine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyridoxine, 4,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyridin-3-ol, a form of vitamin B6.
0030246	name:Name:carbohydrate binding	name:Synonym:selectin	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any carbohydrate, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0005529	name:Name:sugar binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any mono-, di- or trisaccharide carbohydrate.
0048029	name:Name:monosaccharide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any monosaccharide. Monosaccharides are the simplest carbohydrates; they are polyhydroxy aldehydes H[CH(OH)]nC(=O)H or polyhydroxy ketones H[CHOH]nC(=O)[CHOH]mH with three or more carbon atoms. They form the constitutional repeating units of oligo- and polysaccharides.
0048030	name:Name:disaccharide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any disaccharide. Disaccharides are sugars composed of two monosaccharide units.
0048031	name:Name:trisaccharide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any trisaccharide. Trisaccharides are sugars composed of three monosaccharide units.
0072571	name:Name:mono-ADP-D-ribose binding	name:Synonym:mADPr binding	name:Synonym:mono-ADP-ribose binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with monomeric ADP-D-ribose, an ADP-aldose having ribose as the aldose fragment.
0070492	name:Name:oligosaccharide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any oligosaccharide, a molecule with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
0072570	name:Name:ADP-D-ribose binding	name:Synonym:ADP-ribose binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ADP-D-ribose, an ADP-aldose having ribose as the aldose fragment.
0031406	name:Name:carboxylic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a carboxylic acid, any organic acid containing one or more carboxyl (COOH) groups or anions (COO-).
0016597	name:Name:amino acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an amino acid, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents.
0016594	name:Name:glycine binding	name:Synonym:aminoacetic acid binding	name:Synonym:aminoethanoic acid binding	name:Synonym:Gly binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glycine, aminoethanoic acid.
0016595	name:Name:glutamate binding	name:Synonym:glutamic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glutamate, the anion of 2-aminopentanedioic acid.
0034618	name:Name:arginine binding	name:Synonym:aminopentanoic acid binding	name:Synonym:Arg binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 2-amino-5-(carbamimidamido)pentanoic acid.
0050815	name:Name:phosphoserine binding	name:Synonym:phosphoserine/phosphothreonine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a phosphorylated serine residue within a protein.
0070335	name:Name:aspartate binding	name:Synonym:aspartic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glutamate, the anion of 2-aminobutanedioic acid.
0070406	name:Name:glutamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glutamine, 2,5-diamino-5-oxopentanoic acid.
0070728	name:Name:leucine binding	name:Synonym:Leu binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 2-amino-4-methylpentanoic acid.
0070905	name:Name:serine binding	name:Synonym:Ser binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 2-amino-3-hydroxypropanoic acid.
0072341	name:Name:modified amino acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a modified amino acid.
0072545	name:Name:tyrosine binding	name:Synonym:Tyr binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with2-amino-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid.
0031405	name:Name:lipoic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lipoic acid, 1,2-dithiolane-3-pentanoic acid.
0043544	name:Name:lipoamide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lipoamide, the functional form of lipoic acid in which the carboxyl group is attached to protein by an amide linkage to a lysine amino group.
0033293	name:Name:monocarboxylic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a monocarboxylic acid, any organic acid containing one carboxyl (COOH) group or anion (COO-).
0001972	name:Name:retinoic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with retinoic acid, 3,7-dimethyl-9-(2,6,-trimethyl-1-cyclohexen-1-yl)-2,4,6,8-nonatetraenoic acid.
0033294	name:Name:ectoine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ectoine, 1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinecarboxylic acid.
0033295	name:Name:hydroxyectoine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with hydroxyectoine.
0051870	name:Name:methotrexate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with methotrexate, an antineoplastic antimetabolite with immunosuppressant properties. It is an inhibitor of tetrahydrofolate reductase and prevents the formation of tetrahydrofolate, necessary for synthesis of thymidylate, an essential component of DNA.
0031409	name:Name:pigment binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, e.g. melanin.
0033218	name:Name:amide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an amide, any derivative of an oxoacid in which an acidic hydroxy group has been replaced by an amino or substituted amino group.
0033219	name:Name:urea binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with urea, a water-soluble carboxamide with the structure H2N-CO-NH2.
0035730	name:Name:S-nitrosoglutathione binding	name:Synonym:GSNO binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with S-nitrosoglutathione, a nitrosothiol considered to be a natural nitric oxide (NO) donor involved in S-nitrosylation, and in the storage and transport of nitric oxide in biological systems.
0035731	name:Name:dinitrosyl-iron complex binding	name:Synonym:dinitrosyl-diglutathionyl-iron complex binding	name:Synonym:DNDGIC binding	name:Synonym:DNIC binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a dinitrosyl-iron complex. Nitric oxide (NO) is stored as dinitrosyl-iron complexes, which form spontaneously from Glutathione (GSH), S-nitrosoglutathione, and trace amounts of ferrous ions.
0035923	name:Name:flurbiprofen binding	name:Synonym:2-(2-fluoro-[1,1'-biphenyl-4-yl])propanoic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with flurbiprofen.
0042165	name:Name:neurotransmitter binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a neurotransmitter, any chemical substance that is capable of transmitting (or inhibiting the transmission of) a nerve impulse from a neuron to another cell.
0031626	name:Name:beta-endorphin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with beta-endorphin, a peptide generated by the cleavage of pro-opiomelanocortin.
0042166	name:Name:acetylcholine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with acetylcholine, an acetic acid ester of the organic base choline that functions as a neurotransmitter, released at the synapses of parasympathetic nerves and at neuromuscular junctions.
0042277	name:Name:peptide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with peptides, any of a group of organic compounds comprising two or more amino acids linked by peptide bonds.
0005048	name:Name:signal sequence binding	name:Synonym:leader sequence binding	name:Synonym:protein signal sequence binding	name:Synonym:signal sequence receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a signal sequence, a specific peptide sequence found on protein precursors or mature proteins that dictates where the mature protein is localized.
0000268	name:Name:peroxisome targeting sequence binding	name:Synonym:peroxisome targeting signal receptor	name:Synonym:PTS binding	name:Synonym:PTS receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a peroxisomal targeting sequence, any of several sequences of amino acids within a protein that can act as a signal for the localization of the protein into the peroxisome.
0008139	name:Name:nuclear localization sequence binding	name:Synonym:NLS binding	name:Synonym:nuclear localisation sequence binding	name:Synonym:nuclear localization signal binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a nuclear localization sequence, a specific peptide sequence that acts as a signal to localize the protein within the nucleus.
0010209	name:Name:vacuolar sorting signal binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a vacuolar sorting signal, a specific peptide sequence that acts as a signal to localize the protein within the vacuole.
0030941	name:Name:chloroplast targeting sequence binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a chloroplast targeting sequence, a specific peptide sequence that acts as a signal to localize the protein within the chloroplast.
0030942	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum signal peptide binding	name:Synonym:ER signal peptide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an endoplasmic reticulum signal peptide, a specific peptide sequence that acts as a signal to localize the protein within the endoplasmic reticulum.
0030943	name:Name:mitochondrion targeting sequence binding	name:Synonym:mitochondrial targeting sequence binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a mitochondrion targeting sequence, a specific peptide sequence that acts as a signal to localize the protein within the mitochondrion.
0046923	name:Name:ER retention sequence binding	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum retention sequence binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention sequence, a specific peptide sequence that ensures a protein is retained within the ER.
0017046	name:Name:peptide hormone binding	name:Synonym:polypeptide hormone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any peptide with hormonal activity in animals.
0032841	name:Name:calcitonin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with calcitonin, a peptide hormone responsible for reducing serum calcium levels by inhibiting osteoclastic bone reabsorption and promoting renal calcium excretion. It is synthesized and released by the C cells of the thyroid.
0043559	name:Name:insulin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with insulin, a polypeptide hormone produced by the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas in mammals, and by the homologous organs of other organisms.
0051424	name:Name:corticotropin-releasing hormone binding	name:Synonym:corticoliberin binding	name:Synonym:corticotropin-releasing factor binding	name:Synonym:CRF binding	name:Synonym:CRH binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with corticotropin-releasing hormone, a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. It is released by the hypothalamus and stimulates the release of corticotropin by the anterior pituitary gland.
0051448	name:Name:gonadotropin-releasing hormone binding	name:Synonym:gonadotrophin releasing hormone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with gonadotropin-releasing hormone, a peptide hormone responsible for the release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary and it is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus.
0051449	name:Name:thyrotropin-releasing hormone binding	name:Synonym:thyrotropin releasing hormone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thyrotropin-releasing hormone, a tripeptide hormone that stimulates the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin by the anterior pituitary and it is produced by the hypothalamus and travels across the median eminence to the pituitary via the pituitary portal system.
0097004	name:Name:adipokinetic hormone binding	name:Synonym:AKH binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an adipokinetic hormone. Adipokinetic hormones (AKHs) are peptide hormones that are involved in the mobilization of sugar and lipids from the insect fat body during energy-requiring activities such as flight and locomotion. They also contribute to hemolymph sugar homeostasis.
0042923	name:Name:neuropeptide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and stoichiometrically with neuropeptides, peptides with direct synaptic effects (peptide neurotransmitters) or indirect modulatory effects on the nervous system (peptide neuromodulators).
0042924	name:Name:neuromedin U binding	name:Synonym:NMU binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently and stoichiometrically with neuromedin U, a hypothalamic peptide involved in energy homeostasis and stress responses.
0043295	name:Name:glutathione binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with glutathione; a tripeptide composed of the three amino acids cysteine, glutamic acid and glycine.
0071723	name:Name:lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial lipoprotein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipopeptide, any of a group of organic compounds comprising two or more amino acids linked by peptide bonds and containing a nonprotein group consisting of a lipid or lipids.
0042497	name:Name:triacyl lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial triacyl lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial triacyl lipoprotein binding	name:Synonym:triacylated lipopeptide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipopeptide containing a nonprotein moiety consisting of three acyl groups.
0042498	name:Name:diacyl lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial diacyl lipopeptide binding	name:Synonym:bacterial diacyl lipoprotein binding	name:Synonym:diacylated lipopeptide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipopeptide containing a nonprotein moiety consisting of two acyl groups.
0042562	name:Name:hormone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any hormone, naturally occurring substances secreted by specialized cells that affect the metabolism or behavior of other cells possessing functional receptors for the hormone.
0004978	name:Name:corticotropin receptor activity	name:Synonym:ACTH receptor activity	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotropic hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotropin receptor activity	info:Definition:Combining with corticotropin to initiate a change in cell activity.
0004980	name:Name:melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:melanocyte stimulating hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:melanophore-stimulating hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:MSH receptor activity	name:Synonym:MSHR activity	info:Definition:Combining with melanocyte-stimulating hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0010011	name:Name:auxin binding	name:Synonym:auxin receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with auxin, plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0042654	name:Name:ecdysis-triggering hormone receptor activity	name:Synonym:ecdysis-triggering hormone binding	name:Synonym:ETH receptor	info:Definition:Combining with ecdysis-triggering hormone to initiate a change in cell activity.
0070324	name:Name:thyroid hormone binding	name:Synonym:thyroxine binding	name:Synonym:triiodothyronine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with thyroxine (T4) or triiodothyronine (T3), tyrosine-based hormones produced by the thyroid gland.
0043021	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein binding	name:Synonym:RNP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any complex of RNA and protein.
0005047	name:Name:signal recognition particle binding	name:Synonym:docking protein	name:Synonym:signal recognition particle receptor	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the signal recognition particle.
0030519	name:Name:snoRNP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of a small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein particle.
0043022	name:Name:ribosome binding	name:Synonym:ribosome receptor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of a ribosome.
0043023	name:Name:ribosomal large subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of the larger ribosomal subunit.
0043024	name:Name:ribosomal small subunit binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of the small ribosomal subunit.
0070990	name:Name:snRNP binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any part of a small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle.
0043167	name:Name:ion binding	name:Synonym:atom binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ions, charged atoms or groups of atoms.
0043168	name:Name:anion binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with anions, charged atoms or groups of atoms with a net negative charge.
0030973	name:Name:molybdate ion binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with molybdate (MoO4 2-) ions.
0031404	name:Name:chloride ion binding	name:Synonym:chloride binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with chloride ions (Cl-).
0035273	name:Name:phthalate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a phthalate, any ester or salt of phthalic acid.
0042301	name:Name:phosphate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with phosphate.
0043199	name:Name:sulfate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with sulfate, SO4(2-), a negatively charged small molecule.
0043210	name:Name:alkanesulfonate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with alkanesulfonates, the anion of alkanesulfonic acids, sulfonic acid derivatives containing an aliphatic hydrocarbon group.
0046714	name:Name:borate binding	name:Synonym:boron binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with borate, the anion (BO3)3-.
0048032	name:Name:galacturonate binding	name:Synonym:galacturonic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any galacturonate. Galacturonate is the anion of galacturonic acid, the uronic acid formally derived from galactose by oxidation of the hydroxymethylene group at C-6 to a carboxyl group.
0071890	name:Name:bicarbonate binding	name:Synonym:hydrogencarbonate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with bicarbonate (CHO3-) ions.
0043169	name:Name:cation binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with cations, charged atoms or groups of atoms with a net positive charge.
0033265	name:Name:choline binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with choline, the amine 2-hydroxy-N,N,N-trimethylethanaminium.
0046872	name:Name:metal ion binding	name:Synonym:heavy metal binding	name:Synonym:metal binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any metal ion.
0070405	name:Name:ammonium ion binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ammonium ions (NH4+).
0043176	name:Name:amine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any organic compound that is weakly basic in character and contains an amino or a substituted amino group.
0019808	name:Name:polyamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with polyamines, organic compounds containing two or more amino groups.
0019809	name:Name:spermidine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with spermidine, N-(3-aminopropyl)-1,4-diaminobutane.
0019810	name:Name:putrescine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with putrescine, 1,4-diaminobutane, the polyamine formed by decarboxylation of ornithine and the metabolic precursor of spermidine and spermine.
0030977	name:Name:taurine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with taurine.
0033226	name:Name:2-aminoethylphosphonate binding	name:Synonym:2-phosphonoethylamine binding	name:Synonym:ciliatine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with 2-aminoethylphosphonate.
0035240	name:Name:dopamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with dopamine, a catecholamine neurotransmitter formed by aromatic-L-amino-acid decarboxylase from 3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine.
0051378	name:Name:serotonin binding	name:Synonym:5-hydroxytryptamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), a monoamine neurotransmitter occurring in the peripheral and central nervous systems, also having hormonal properties.
0051379	name:Name:epinephrine binding	name:Synonym:adrenaline binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with epinephrine, a hormone produced by the medulla of the adrenal glands that increases heart activity, improves the power and prolongs the action of muscles, and increases the rate and depth of breathing. It is synthesized by the methylation of norepinephrine.
0051380	name:Name:norepinephrine binding	name:Synonym:noradrenaline binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with norepinephrine, (3,4-dihydroxyphenyl-2-aminoethanol), a hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla and a neurotransmitter in the sympathetic peripheral nervous system and in some tracts of the CNS. It is also the biosynthetic precursor of epinephrine.
0051381	name:Name:histamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with histamine, a physiologically active amine, found in plant and animal tissue and released from mast cells as part of an allergic reaction in humans.
0071886	name:Name:1-(4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)propan-2-amine binding	name:Synonym:(+/-)2-(4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)-1-methyl-ethylamine binding	name:Synonym:1-(4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane binding	name:Synonym:4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenylisopropylamine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the amine 1-(4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)propan-2-amine, a serotonin receptor agonist that can act as a psychedelic drug.
0043177	name:Name:organic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an organic acid, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage.
0043178	name:Name:alcohol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an alcohol, any of a class of alkyl compounds containing a hydroxyl group.
0000822	name:Name:inositol hexakisphosphate binding	name:Synonym:InsP6 binding	name:Synonym:IP6 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inositol hexakisphosphate.
0035276	name:Name:ethanol binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ethanol, CH(3)-CH(2)-OH.
0043533	name:Name:inositol 1,3,4,5 tetrakisphosphate binding	name:Synonym:InsP4 binding	name:Synonym:IP4 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inositol 1,3,4,5 tetrakisphosphate.
0070679	name:Name:inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate binding	name:Synonym:InsP3 binding	name:Synonym:IP3 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate.
0043287	name:Name:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) binding	name:Synonym:PHA binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate)s, polyesters of 3-hydroxyacids produced as intracellular granules by a large variety of bacteria.
0043498	name:Name:cell surface binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component on the surface of a cell.
0043499	name:Name:eukaryotic cell surface binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component on the surface of a eukaryotic cell.
0051635	name:Name:bacterial cell surface binding	name:Synonym:bacterial binding	name:Synonym:bacterium binding	name:Synonym:bacterium cell surface binding	name:Synonym:binding to bacterium	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component on the surface of a bacterial cell.
0051636	name:Name:Gram-negative bacterial cell surface binding	name:Synonym:binding to Gram-negative bacterium	name:Synonym:Gram-negative bacterial binding	name:Synonym:Gram-negative bacterium binding	name:Synonym:Gram-negative bacterium cell surface binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component on the surface of a Gram-negative bacterial cell.
0051637	name:Name:Gram-positive bacterial cell surface binding	name:Synonym:binding to Gram-positive bacterium	name:Synonym:Gram-positive bacterial binding	name:Synonym:Gram-positive bacterium binding	name:Synonym:Gram-positive bacterium cell surface binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with any component on the surface of a Gram-positive bacterium.
0043515	name:Name:kinetochore binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a kinetochore, a proteinaceous structure on a condensed chromosome, beside the centromere, to which the spindle fibers are attached.
0043924	name:Name:suramin binding	name:Synonym:Germanin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with suramin, a naphthalenesulfonic acid compound which is used in the treatment of diseases caused by trypanosomes and worms.
0046790	name:Name:virion binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a virion, either by binding to components of the capsid or the viral envelope.
0046812	name:Name:host cell surface binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the surface of a host cell.
0046848	name:Name:hydroxyapatite binding	name:Synonym:hydroxylapatite binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with hydroxyapatite, the calcium phosphate mineral of formula Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2 found both in rocks of nonorganic origin and as a component of bone and dentine.
0046904	name:Name:calcium oxalate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with calcium oxalate, CaC2O4, a salt of oxalic acid. In animals, it may be excreted in urine or retained in the form of urinary calculi.
0046906	name:Name:tetrapyrrole binding	name:Synonym:porphyrin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a tetrapyrrole, a compound containing four pyrrole nuclei variously substituted and linked to each other through carbons at the alpha position.
0016168	name:Name:chlorophyll binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with chlorophyll; any compound of magnesium complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring and which functions as a photosynthetic pigment.
0042314	name:Name:bacteriochlorophyll binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with bacteriochlorophyll, a form of chlorophyll found in photosynthetic bacteria, such as the purple and green bacteria. There are several types, designated a to g. Bacteriochlorophyll a and bacteriochlorophyll b are structurally similar to the chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b found in plants.
0020037	name:Name:heme binding	name:Synonym:haem binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring.
0048037	name:Name:cofactor binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a cofactor, a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein. Cofactors may be inorganic, such as the metal atoms zinc, iron, and copper in certain forms, or organic, in which case they are referred to as coenzymes. Cofactors may either be bound tightly to active sites or bind loosely with the substrate.
0048038	name:Name:quinone binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a quinone, any member of a class of diketones derivable from aromatic compounds by conversion of two CH groups into CO groups with any necessary rearrangement of double bonds.
0048039	name:Name:ubiquinone binding	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q binding	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q6 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ubiquinone, a quinone derivative with a tail of isoprene units.
0070968	name:Name:pyrroloquinoline quinone binding	name:Synonym:PQQ binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with pyrroloquinoline quinone, PQQ, the coenzyme or the prosthetic group of certain alcohol dehydrogenases and glucose dehydrogenases.
0050662	name:Name:coenzyme binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a coenzyme, any of various nonprotein organic cofactors that are required, in addition to an enzyme and a substrate, for an enzymatic reaction to proceed.
0034617	name:Name:tetrahydrobiopterin binding	name:Synonym:BH4 binding	name:Synonym:H4biopterin binding	name:Synonym:sapropterin binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a tetrahydrobiopterin, 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin or a derivative thereof; tetrahydrobiopterins are enzyme cofactors that carry electrons in redox reactions.
0043546	name:Name:molybdopterin cofactor binding	name:Synonym:Moco binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the molybdopterin cofactor (Moco), essential for the catalytic activity of some enzymes, e.g. sulfite oxidase, xanthine dehydrogenase, and aldehyde oxidase. The cofactor consists of a mononuclear molybdenum (Mo-molybdopterin) or tungsten ion (W-molybdopterin) coordinated by one or two molybdopterin ligands.
0050660	name:Name:flavin adenine dinucleotide binding	name:Synonym:FAD or FADH2 binding	name:Synonym:flavine-adenine dinucleotide binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with FAD, flavin-adenine dinucleotide, the coenzyme or the prosthetic group of various flavoprotein oxidoreductase enzymes, in either the oxidized form, FAD, or the reduced form, FADH2.
0070967	name:Name:coenzyme F420 binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with F420, the coenzyme or the prosthetic group of various flavoprotein oxidoreductase enzymes.
0051192	name:Name:prosthetic group binding	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a prosthetic group, the non-amino acid portion of certain protein molecules.
0050436	name:Name:microfibril binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a microfibril, any small fibril occurring in biological material.
0050824	name:Name:water binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with water (H2O).
0050825	name:Name:ice binding	name:Synonym:antifreeze activity	name:Synonym:ice crystal binding	name:Synonym:ice nucleation activity	name:Synonym:ice nucleation inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ice, water reduced to the solid state by cold temperature. It is a white or transparent colorless substance, crystalline, brittle, and viscoidal.
0050840	name:Name:extracellular matrix binding	name:Synonym:adhesive extracellular matrix constituent	name:Synonym:extracellular matrix constituent binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a component of the extracellular matrix.
0046810	name:Name:host cell extracellular matrix binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with the extracellular matrix of a host cell.
0050997	name:Name:quaternary ammonium group binding	name:Synonym:quaternary amine binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a quaternary ammonium group, including glycine betaine, choline, carnitine and proline. A quaternary ammonium group is any compound that can be regarded as derived from ammonium hydroxide or an ammonium salt by replacement of all four hydrogen atoms of the NH4+ ion by organic groups.
0051540	name:Name:metal cluster binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a cluster of atoms including both metal ions and nonmetal atoms, usually sulfur and oxygen. Examples include iron-sulfur clusters and nickel-iron-sulfur clusters.
0051536	name:Name:iron-sulfur cluster binding	name:Synonym:Fe/S binding	name:Synonym:iron sulfur cluster binding	name:Synonym:iron sulphur cluster binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulphur cluster binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an iron-sulfur cluster, a combination of iron and sulfur atoms.
0051537	name:Name:2 iron, 2 sulfur cluster binding	name:Synonym:2 Fe 2 S cluster binding	name:Synonym:2 iron, 2 sulphur cluster binding	name:Synonym:2Fe-2S cluster binding	name:Synonym:diiron disulfide cluster binding	name:Synonym:diiron disulphide cluster binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulfur cluster 2Fe-2S binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulphur cluster 2Fe-2S binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 2 iron, 2 sulfur (2Fe-2S) cluster; this cluster consists of two iron atoms, with two inorganic sulfur atoms found between the irons and acting as bridging ligands.
0051538	name:Name:3 iron, 4 sulfur cluster binding	name:Synonym:3 Fe 4 S cluster binding	name:Synonym:3 iron, 4 sulphur cluster binding	name:Synonym:3Fe-4S cluster binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulfur cluster 3Fe-4S binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulphur cluster 3Fe-4S binding	name:Synonym:triiron tetrasulfide cluster binding	name:Synonym:triiron tetrasulphide cluster binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 3 iron, 4 sulfur (3Fe-4S) cluster; this cluster consists of three iron atoms, with the inorganic sulfur atoms found between the irons and acting as bridging ligands. It is essentially a 4Fe-4S cluster with one iron missing.
0051539	name:Name:4 iron, 4 sulfur cluster binding	name:Synonym:4 Fe 4 S cluster binding	name:Synonym:4 iron, 4 sulphur cluster binding	name:Synonym:4Fe-4S cluster binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulfur cluster 4Fe-4S binding	name:Synonym:iron-sulphur cluster 4Fe-4S binding	name:Synonym:tetrairon tetrasulfide cluster binding	name:Synonym:tetrairon tetrasulphide cluster binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a 4 iron, 4 sulfur (4Fe-4S) cluster; this cluster consists of four iron atoms, with the inorganic sulfur atoms found between the irons and acting as bridging ligands.
0051871	name:Name:dihydrofolic acid binding	name:Synonym:DHF binding	name:Synonym:dihydrofolate binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with dihydrofolic acid, a folic acid in which the bicyclic pteridine structure is in the dihydro, partially reduced form; they are intermediates in folate metabolism and are reduced to their tetrahydro, reduced forms.
0060090	name:Name:binding, bridging	name:Synonym:molecular adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together two or more molecules, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way.
0030533	name:Name:triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:transfer RNA	name:Synonym:tRNA	info:Definition:The codon binding activity of a tRNA that positions an activated amino acid, mediating its insertion at the correct point in the sequence of a nascent polypeptide chain during protein synthesis.
0033401	name:Name:UUU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:phenylalanine tRNA	name:Synonym:TTT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UUU codon.
0033402	name:Name:UUC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:phenylalanine tRNA	name:Synonym:TTC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UUC codon.
0033403	name:Name:UUA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	name:Synonym:TTA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UUA codon.
0033404	name:Name:UUG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	name:Synonym:TTG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UUG codon.
0033405	name:Name:UCU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	name:Synonym:TCT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UCU codon.
0033406	name:Name:UCC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	name:Synonym:TCC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UCC codon.
0033407	name:Name:UCA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	name:Synonym:TCA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UCA codon.
0033408	name:Name:UCG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	name:Synonym:TCG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UCG codon.
0033409	name:Name:UAU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TAT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:tyrosine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UAU codon.
0033410	name:Name:UAC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TAC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:tyrosine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UAC codon.
0033411	name:Name:UAA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TAA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UAA codon.
0033412	name:Name:UAG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TAG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UAG codon.
0033413	name:Name:UGU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:cysteine tRNA	name:Synonym:TGT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UGU codon.
0033414	name:Name:UGC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:cysteine tRNA	name:Synonym:TGC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UGC codon.
0033415	name:Name:UGA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TGA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UGA codon.
0033416	name:Name:UGG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:TGG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:tryptophan tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a UGG codon.
0033417	name:Name:CUU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CTT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CUU codon.
0033418	name:Name:CUC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CTC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CUC codon.
0033419	name:Name:CUA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CTA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CUA codon.
0033420	name:Name:CUG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CTG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:leucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CUG codon.
0033421	name:Name:CCU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CCT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:proline tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CCU codon.
0033422	name:Name:CCC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:proline tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CCC codon.
0033423	name:Name:CCA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:proline tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CCA codon.
0033424	name:Name:CCG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:proline tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CCG codon.
0033425	name:Name:CAU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:CAT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:histidine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CAU codon.
0033426	name:Name:CAC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:histidine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CAC codon.
0033427	name:Name:CAA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glutamine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CAA codon.
0033428	name:Name:CAG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glutamine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CAG codon.
0033429	name:Name:CGU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	name:Synonym:CGT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CGU codon.
0033430	name:Name:CGC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CGC codon.
0033431	name:Name:CGA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CGA codon.
0033432	name:Name:CGG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a CGG codon.
0033433	name:Name:AUU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:ATT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:isoleucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AUU codon.
0033434	name:Name:AUC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:ATC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:isoleucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AUC codon.
0033435	name:Name:AUA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:ATA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:isoleucine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AUA codon.
0033436	name:Name:AUG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:ATG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:initiator methionine tRNA	name:Synonym:methionine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AUG codon.
0033437	name:Name:ACU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:ACT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:threonine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an ACU codon.
0033438	name:Name:ACC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:threonine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an ACC codon.
0033439	name:Name:ACA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:threonine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an ACA codon.
0033440	name:Name:ACG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:threonine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an ACG codon.
0033441	name:Name:AAU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:AAT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:asparagine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AAU codon.
0033442	name:Name:AAC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:asparagine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AAC codon.
0033443	name:Name:AAA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:lysine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AAA codon.
0033444	name:Name:AAG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:lysine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AAG codon.
0033445	name:Name:AGU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:AGT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AGU codon.
0033446	name:Name:AGC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:serine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AGC codon.
0033447	name:Name:AGA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AGA codon.
0033448	name:Name:AGG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:arginine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes an AGG codon.
0033449	name:Name:GUU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:GTT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:valine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GUU codon.
0033450	name:Name:GUC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:GTC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:valine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GUC codon.
0033451	name:Name:GUA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:GTA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:valine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GUA codon.
0033452	name:Name:GUG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:GTG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:valine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GUG codon.
0033453	name:Name:GCU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:alanine tRNA	name:Synonym:GCT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GCU codon.
0033454	name:Name:GCC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:alanine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GCC codon.
0033455	name:Name:GCA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:alanine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GCA codon.
0033456	name:Name:GCG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:alanine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GCG codon.
0033457	name:Name:GAU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:aspartic acid tRNA	name:Synonym:GAT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GAU codon.
0033458	name:Name:GAC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:aspartic acid tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GAC codon.
0033459	name:Name:GAA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glutamic acid tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GAA codon.
0033460	name:Name:GAG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glutamic acid tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GAG codon.
0033461	name:Name:GGU codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:GGT codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glycine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GGU codon.
0033462	name:Name:GGC codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glycine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GGC codon.
0033463	name:Name:GGA codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glycine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GGA codon.
0033464	name:Name:GGG codon-amino acid adaptor activity	name:Synonym:glycine tRNA	info:Definition:A triplet codon-amino acid adaptor activity that recognizes a GGG codon.
0035591	name:Name:signaling adaptor activity	name:Synonym:signalling adaptor activity	info:Definition:The binding activity of a molecule that brings together two or more molecules in a signaling pathway, permitting those molecules to function in a coordinated way. Adaptor molecules themselves do not have catalytic activity.
0070025	name:Name:carbon monoxide binding	name:Synonym:CO binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with carbon monoxide (CO).
0070027	name:Name:carbon monoxide sensor activity	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with and responding, e.g. by conformational change, to changes in the cellular level of carbon monoxide (CO).
0070026	name:Name:nitric oxide binding	name:Synonym:nitrogen monoxide binding	name:Synonym:nitrosyl binding	name:Synonym:NO binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with nitric oxide (NO).
0070891	name:Name:lipoteichoic acid binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with lipoteichoic acid.
0071814	name:Name:protein-lipid complex binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a protein-lipid complex, any macromolecular complex that contains both protein and lipid molecules.
0071813	name:Name:lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:lipoprotein binding	name:Synonym:plasma lipoprotein binding	name:Synonym:plasma lipoprotein particle binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a lipoprotein particle. A lipoprotein particle, also known as a lipoprotein, is a clathrate complex consisting of a lipid enwrapped in a protein host without covalent binding in such a way that the complex has a hydrophilic outer surface consisting of all the protein and the polar ends of any phospholipids.
0008035	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:HDL binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with high-density lipoprotein particle, a lipoprotein particle with a high density (typically 1.063-1.21 g/ml) and a diameter of 5-10 nm that contains APOAs and may contain APOCs and APOE.
0030169	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:LDL binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a low-density lipoprotein particle, a lipoprotein particle that is rich in cholesterol esters and low in triglycerides, is typically composed of APOB100 and APOE, and has a density of 1.02-1.06 g/ml and a diameter of between 20-25 nm.
0034189	name:Name:very-low-density lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:very-low-density lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:VLDL binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a low-density lipoprotein particle, a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle that is typically composed of APOB100, APOE and APOCs and has a density of about 1.006 g/ml and a diameter of between 20-80 nm.
0035478	name:Name:chylomicron binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a chylomicron, a large lipoprotein particle (diameter 75-1200 nm) composed of a central core of triglycerides and cholesterol surrounded by a protein-phospholipid coating. The proteins include one molecule of apolipoprotein B-48 and may include a variety of apolipoproteins, including APOAs, APOCs and APOE.
0071815	name:Name:intermediate-density lipoprotein particle binding	name:Synonym:IDL binding	name:Synonym:intermediate-density lipoprotein binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with a intermediate-density lipoprotein particle, a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle that typically contains APOB100, APOE and APOCs and has a density of 1.006-1.019 g/ml and a diameter of between 25-30 nm.
0072328	name:Name:alkene binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with an alkene, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having one carbon-carbon double bond and the general formula CnH2n.
0051740	name:Name:ethylene binding	name:Synonym:ethene binding	info:Definition:Interacting selectively and non-covalently with ethylene (C2-H4, ethene), a simple hydrocarbon gas that can function in plants as a growth regulator.
0009055	name:Name:electron carrier activity	name:Synonym:2Fe-2S electron transfer carrier	name:Synonym:3Fe-4S/4Fe-4S electron transfer carrier	name:Synonym:adrenodoxin-type ferredoxin	name:Synonym:amicyanin	name:Synonym:azurin	name:Synonym:bacterial-type ferredoxin	name:Synonym:chloroplast-type ferredoxin	name:Synonym:copper electron carrier	name:Synonym:dicluster bacterial-type ferredoxin	name:Synonym:electron acceptor activity	name:Synonym:electron carrier, chlorophyll electron transport system	name:Synonym:electron donor activity	name:Synonym:electron transfer flavoprotein	name:Synonym:electron transfer flavoprotein, group I	name:Synonym:electron transfer flavoprotein, group II	name:Synonym:electron transporter activity	name:Synonym:high-potential iron-sulfur carrier	name:Synonym:iron-sulfur electron transfer carrier	name:Synonym:monocluster bacterial-type ferredoxin	name:Synonym:mononuclear iron electron carrier	name:Synonym:polyferredoxin	name:Synonym:redox-active disulfide bond electron carrier	name:Synonym:rubredoxin	name:Synonym:small blue copper electron carrier	name:Synonym:thioredoxin-like 2Fe-2S ferredoxin	info:Definition:Any molecular entity that serves as an electron acceptor and electron donor in an electron transport system.
0045153	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons within CoQH2-cytochrome c reductase complex activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	name:Synonym:cytochrome b562	name:Synonym:cytochrome b566	name:Synonym:cytochrome c1	name:Synonym:soluble cytochrome b562	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons within the CoQH2-cytochrome c reductase complex.
0045154	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons within cytochrome c oxidase complex activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	name:Synonym:cytochrome a	name:Synonym:cytochrome a3/copper complex	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons within the cytochrome c oxidase complex.
0045155	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons from CoQH2-cytochrome c reductase complex and cytochrome c oxidase complex activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	name:Synonym:cytochrome c	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons from the CoQH2-cytochrome c reductase complex and the cytochrome c oxidase complex.
0045156	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons within the cyclic electron transport pathway of photosynthesis activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	name:Synonym:cytochrome bc1 complex	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons within the cyclic electron transport pathway of photosynthesis.
0045157	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons within the noncyclic electron transport pathway of photosynthesis activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons within the noncyclic electron transport pathway of photosynthesis.
0045158	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons within cytochrome b6/f complex of photosystem II activity	name:Synonym:cytochrome	name:Synonym:cytochrome b/b6	name:Synonym:cytochrome b6	name:Synonym:cytochrome f	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons within the cytochrome b6/f complex of photosystem II.
0046028	name:Name:electron transporter, transferring electrons from cytochrome b6/f complex of photosystem II activity	name:Synonym:plastocyanin	info:Definition:Enables the directed movement of electrons from the cytochrome b6/f complex of photosystem II.
0016015	name:Name:morphogen activity	info:Definition:Acts as a trigger for a pattern specification process when present at a specific concentration within a gradient.
0016209	name:Name:antioxidant activity	info:Definition:Inhibition of the reactions brought about by dioxygen (O2) or peroxides. Usually the antioxidant is effective because it can itself be more easily oxidized than the substance protected. The term is often applied to components that can trap free radicals, thereby breaking the chain reaction that normally leads to extensive biological damage.
0004362	name:Name:glutathione-disulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione reductase (NADPH) activity	name:Synonym:glutathione reductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione S-reductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione-disulphide reductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione:NADP+ oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:GSH reductase activity	name:Synonym:GSSG reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH-glutathione reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH-GSSG reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:oxidized-glutathione oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:oxidized glutathione reduction	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: 2 glutathione + NADP+ = glutathione disulfide + NADPH + H+.
0004791	name:Name:thioredoxin-disulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADP--thioredoxin reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH--thioredoxin reductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH2:oxidized thioredoxin oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:NADPH:oxidized thioredoxin oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:thioredoxin disulfide reductase activity	name:Synonym:thioredoxin reductase (NADPH) activity	name:Synonym:thioredoxin-disulphide reductase activity	name:Synonym:thioredoxin:NADP+ oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: NADP(+) + thioredoxin = H(+) + NADPH + thioredoxin disulfide.
0045174	name:Name:glutathione dehydrogenase (ascorbate) activity	name:Synonym:dehydroascorbate reductase activity	name:Synonym:dehydroascorbic acid reductase activity	name:Synonym:dehydroascorbic reductase activity	name:Synonym:DHA reductase activity	name:Synonym:GDOR	name:Synonym:glutathione dehydroascorbate reductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione:dehydroascorbate oxidoreductase activity	name:Synonym:glutathione:dehydroascorbic acid oxidoreductase activity	info:Definition:Catalysis of the reaction: dehydroascorbate + 2 glutathione = L-ascorbate + glutathione disulfide.
0016247	name:Name:channel regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a channel. A channel catalyzes energy-independent facilitated diffusion, mediated by passage of a solute through a transmembrane aqueous pore or channel.
0005246	name:Name:calcium channel regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a calcium channel.
0019855	name:Name:calcium channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of a calcium channel.
0015459	name:Name:potassium channel regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a potassium channel.
0019870	name:Name:potassium channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of a potassium channel.
0070320	name:Name:inward rectifier potassium channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of an inwardly rectifying potassium channel.
0016248	name:Name:channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of a channel. A channel catalyzes energy-independent facilitated diffusion, mediated by passage of a solute through a transmembrane aqueous pore or channel.
0008200	name:Name:ion channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of an ion channel.
0019869	name:Name:chloride channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of a chloride channel.
0019871	name:Name:sodium channel inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces the activity of a sodium channel.
0017080	name:Name:sodium channel regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a sodium channel.
0017081	name:Name:chloride channel regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a chloride channel.
0016530	name:Name:metallochaperone activity	info:Definition:Assists in the delivery of metal ions to target proteins or compartments.
0016531	name:Name:copper chaperone activity	info:Definition:Assists in the delivery of copper ions to target proteins or compartments.
0016532	name:Name:superoxide dismutase copper chaperone activity	info:Definition:A copper chaperone activity that specifically delivers copper to the Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase.
0034986	name:Name:iron chaperone activity	info:Definition:Assists in the delivery of iron ions to target proteins or compartments.
0030234	name:Name:enzyme regulator activity	name:Synonym:catalytic regulator activity	name:Synonym:enzyme modulator	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of an enzyme.
0004857	name:Name:enzyme inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of an enzyme.
0004858	name:Name:dUTP pyrophosphatase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of dUTP pyrophosphatase.
0005095	name:Name:GTPase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:GIP	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and orthophosphate.
0008073	name:Name:ornithine decarboxylase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:The stopping, prevention or reduction of the activity of the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase.
0008428	name:Name:ribonuclease inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a ribonuclease, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphodiester bonds in chains of RNA.
0060698	name:Name:endoribonuclease inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of an endoribonuclease, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ester linkages within ribonucleic acid by creating internal breaks.
0008657	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:DNA gyrase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of ATP-hydrolyzing DNA topoisomerase. ATP-hydrolyzing DNA topoisomerase catalyzes the DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving a pair of complementary DNA strands to form a gate through which a second double-stranded DNA segment is passed, after which the severed strands in the first DNA segment are rejoined; product release is coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis; changes the linking number in multiples of 2.
0010521	name:Name:telomerase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a telomerase. Telomerase catalyzes the reaction: deoxynucleoside triphosphate + DNA(n) = diphosphate + DNA(n+1). Catalyzes extension of the 3'- end of a DNA strand by one deoxynucleotide at a time using an internal RNA template that encodes the telomeric repeat sequence.
0015066	name:Name:alpha-amylase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of alpha-amylase.
0019210	name:Name:kinase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a kinase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the transfer of a phosphate group, usually from ATP, to a substrate molecule.
0004860	name:Name:protein kinase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a protein kinase, an enzyme which phosphorylates a protein.
0019212	name:Name:phosphatase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a phosphatase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the removal of a phosphate group from a substrate molecule.
0001691	name:Name:pseudophosphatase activity	info:Definition:Maintains the phosphorylation state of certain molecules by associating with them and preventing them from associating with active phosphatases, and thus inhibiting the enzyme activity without interacting with the enzyme. Often pertains to proteins belonging to dual-specificity phosphatase family but lacking critical active site residues.
0004864	name:Name:protein phosphatase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:phosphoprotein phosphatase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a protein phosphatase, an enzyme that hydrolyzes phosphate groups from phosphorylated proteins.
0030251	name:Name:guanylate cyclase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of guanylate cyclase.
0030414	name:Name:peptidase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:protease inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a peptidase, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis peptide bonds.
0004866	name:Name:endopeptidase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:alpha-2 macroglobulin	name:Synonym:endoproteinase inhibitor	name:Synonym:proteinase inhibitor	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of an endopeptidase, any enzyme that hydrolyzes nonterminal peptide bonds in polypeptides.
0060422	name:Name:peptidyl-dipeptidase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a peptidyl-dipeptidase. Peptidyl-dipeptidase activity catalyzes the release of C-terminal dipeptides from a polypeptide chain.
0042030	name:Name:ATPase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:adenosinetriphosphatase inhibitor	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and orthophosphate.
0046811	name:Name:histone deacetylase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of histone deacetylase, which catalyzes of the removal of acetyl groups from histones, proteins complexed to DNA in chromatin and chromosomes.
0046910	name:Name:pectinesterase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of any pectinesterase enzyme.
0048551	name:Name:metalloenzyme inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a metalloenzyme. A metalloenzyme is any enzyme that contains metal.
0008191	name:Name:metalloendopeptidase inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:metalloprotease inhibitor	name:Synonym:metalloproteinase inhibitor	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of metalloendopeptidases, enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of nonterminal peptide bonds in a polypeptide chain and contain a chelated metal ion at their active sites which is essential to their catalytic activity.
0055102	name:Name:lipase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a lipase, an enzyme that catalyzes of the hydrolysis of a lipid.
0004859	name:Name:phospholipase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a phospholipase, an enzyme that catalyzes of the hydrolysis of a phospholipid.
0055104	name:Name:ligase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a ligase.
0055105	name:Name:ubiquitin-protein ligase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a ubiquitin-protein ligase.
0060241	name:Name:lysozyme inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a lysozyme, an enzyme that hydrolyses the beta- (1,4) glycosidic bond between N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine in peptidoglycan.
0060703	name:Name:deoxyribonuclease inhibitor activity	name:Synonym:DNase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of deoxyribonuclease.
0090353	name:Name:polygalacturonase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a polygalacturonase. Polygalacturonases catalyze the random hydrolysis of 1,4-alpha-D-galactosiduronic linkages in pectate and other galacturonans.
0090369	name:Name:ornithine carbamoyltransferase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents, or reduces ornithine carbamoyltransferase activity, the catalysis of the reaction: carbamoyl phosphate + L-ornithine = phosphate + L-citrulline.
0008047	name:Name:enzyme activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of an enzyme.
0001671	name:Name:ATPase activator activity	name:Synonym:ATPase stimulator activity	info:Definition:Functions to increase the rate of ATP hydrolysis.
0005096	name:Name:GTPase activator activity	name:Synonym:GAP activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a GTPase, an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of GTP.
0005099	name:Name:Ras GTPase activator activity	name:Synonym:Ras GAP activity	info:Definition:Increases the rate of GTP hydrolysis by a GTPase of the Ras superfamily.
0005101	name:Name:Sar GTPase activator activity	name:Synonym:Sar GAP activity	info:Definition:Increases the rate of GTP hydrolysis by a GTPase of the Sar family.
0008060	name:Name:ARF GTPase activator activity	name:Synonym:ARF GAP activity	info:Definition:Increases the rate of GTP hydrolysis by the GTPase ARF.
0010577	name:Name:metalloenzyme activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a metalloenzyme. A metalloenzyme is any enzyme that contains metal.
0010698	name:Name:acetyltransferase activator activity	name:Synonym:acetyltransferase stimulator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of an aceyltransferase, an enzyme which catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group to an acceptor molecule.
0016176	name:Name:superoxide-generating NADPH oxidase activator activity	name:Synonym:neutrophil cytosol factor 2	info:Definition:Increases the activity of the enzyme superoxide-generating NADPH oxidase.
0016483	name:Name:tryptophan hydroxylase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of the enzyme tryptophase hydroxylase.
0016504	name:Name:peptidase activator activity	name:Synonym:protease activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a peptidase, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis peptide bonds.
0016505	name:Name:apoptotic protease activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a peptidase that is involved in the activation of apoptosis.
0035800	name:Name:ubiquitin-specific protease activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a ubiquitin-specific protease, an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of various forms of polymeric ubiquitin sequences.
0061133	name:Name:endopeptidase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of an endopeptidase, any enzyme that hydrolyzes nonterminal peptide bonds in polypeptides.
0018237	name:Name:urease activator activity	name:Synonym:urease activase activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of urease by promoting the incorporation of nickel into the active site.
0019209	name:Name:kinase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a kinase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the transfer of a phosphate group, usually from ATP, to a substrate molecule.
0030295	name:Name:protein kinase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a protein kinase, an enzyme which phosphorylates a protein.
0019211	name:Name:phosphatase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a phosphatase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the removal of a phosphate group from a substrate molecule.
0072542	name:Name:protein phosphatase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a protein phosphatase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the removal of a phosphate group from a protein substrate molecule.
0030250	name:Name:guanylate cyclase activator activity	name:Synonym:guanylin	info:Definition:Increases the activity of guanylate cyclase.
0008048	name:Name:calcium sensitive guanylate cyclase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of guanylate cyclase in response to a change in calcium ion concentration.
0030290	name:Name:sphingolipid activator protein activity	name:Synonym:saposin	info:Definition:Any of a group of peptide cofactors of enzymes for the lysosomal degradation of sphingolipids. They stimulate various enzymes, including glucosylceramidase, galactosylceramidase, cerebroside-sulfatase, alpha-galactosidase, beta-galactosidase, and sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase.
0042978	name:Name:ornithine decarboxylase activator activity	name:Synonym:L-ornithine carboxy-lyase activator activity	info:Definition:Upregulation of the activity of the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase.
0046863	name:Name:ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase activator activity	name:Synonym:ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase activase activity	name:Synonym:ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase activase activity	name:Synonym:rubisco activase activity	name:Synonym:rubisco activator	info:Definition:Increases the activity of rubisco by the removal of otherwise inhibitory sugar phosphates: RuBP, and in some plants, 2-carboxyarabinitol 1-phosphate.
0060228	name:Name:phosphatidylcholine-sterol O-acyltransferase activator activity	name:Synonym:LCAT activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of phosphatidylcholine-sterol O-acyltransferase, an enzyme that converts cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine (lecithins) to cholesteryl esters and lyso-phosphatidylcholines.
0060229	name:Name:lipase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a lipase, an enzyme that catalyzes of the hydrolysis of a lipid.
0016004	name:Name:phospholipase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a phospholipase, an enzyme that catalyzes of the hydrolysis of a glycerophospholipid.
0060230	name:Name:lipoprotein lipase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a lipoprotein lipase, an enzyme that catalyzes of the hydrolysis of a lipid within a lipoprotein.
0072587	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of ATP-hydrolyzing DNA topoisomerase. DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) regulator activity catalyzes a DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving a pair of complementary DNA strands to form a gate through which a second double-stranded DNA segment is passed, after which the severed strands in the first DNA segment are rejoined; product release is coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis; changes the linking number in multiples of 2.
0010576	name:Name:metalloenzyme regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a metalloenzyme. A metalloenzyme is any enzyme that contains metal.
0010851	name:Name:cyclase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of an enzyme that catalyzes a ring closure reaction.
0010852	name:Name:cyclase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Decreases the activity of an enzyme that catalyzes a ring closure reaction.
0010853	name:Name:cyclase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of an enzyme that catalyzes a ring closure reaction.
0010854	name:Name:adenylate cyclase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction: ATP = 3',5'-cyclic AMP + diphosphate.
0010855	name:Name:adenylate cyclase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Decreases the activity of the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction: ATP = 3',5'-cyclic AMP + diphosphate.
0010856	name:Name:adenylate cyclase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction: ATP = 3',5'-cyclic AMP + diphosphate.
0030249	name:Name:guanylate cyclase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of guanylate cyclase.
0016536	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 activator regulator activity	name:Synonym:cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 activator, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 activator.
0019207	name:Name:kinase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a kinase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the transfer of a phosphate group, usually from ATP, to a substrate molecule.
0010307	name:Name:acetylglutamate kinase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the enzyme activity of acetylglutamate kinase.
0019887	name:Name:protein kinase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a protein kinase, an enzyme which phosphorylates a protein.
0008603	name:Name:cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:3',5' cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:3',5'-cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:cAMP-dependent protein kinase, intrinsic regulator activity	name:Synonym:cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
0008607	name:Name:phosphorylase kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:phosphorylase kinase, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme phosphorylase kinase.
0010858	name:Name:calcium-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a calcium-dependent protein kinase, an enzyme which phosphorylates a protein in a calcium-dependent manner.
0016538	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:cyclin	name:Synonym:cyclin-dependent protein kinase, intrinsic regulator activity	name:Synonym:G1/S-specific cyclin	name:Synonym:G2/M-specific cyclin	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a cyclin-dependent protein kinase, enzymes of the protein kinase family that are regulated through association with cyclins and other proteins.
0019914	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase.
0042556	name:Name:eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:eEF-2 kinase regulator	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of the enzyme eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase.
0035014	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide 3-kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:PI3K regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of any of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks). Regulatory subunits can link a PI3K catalytic subunit to upstream signaling events and help position the catalytic subunits close to their lipid substrates.
0046935	name:Name:1-phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase regulator activity	name:Synonym:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, class I, regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of the enzyme 1-phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity.
0019208	name:Name:phosphatase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a phosphatase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the removal of a phosphate group from a substrate molecule.
0019888	name:Name:protein phosphatase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a protein phosphatase, an enzyme which catalyzes of the removal of a phosphate group from a protein substrate molecule.
0008597	name:Name:calcium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase regulator activity	name:Synonym:calcium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme calcium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase.
0008599	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 1 regulator activity	name:Synonym:protein phosphatase type 1, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme protein phosphatase type 1.
0008601	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 2A regulator activity	name:Synonym:protein phosphatase type 2A, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme protein phosphatase type 2A.
0017020	name:Name:myosin phosphatase regulator activity	name:Synonym:myosin phosphatase, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme myosin phosphatase.
0019909	name:Name:[pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide)] phosphatase regulator activity	name:Synonym:[pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide)] phosphatase, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modification of the activity of the enzyme [pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide)] phosphatase.
0030359	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 2B regulator activity	name:Synonym:protein phosphatase type 2B, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme protein phosphatase type 2B.
0030362	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 4 regulator activity	name:Synonym:protein phosphatase type 4, intrinsic regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme protein phosphatase type 4.
0030235	name:Name:nitric-oxide synthase regulator activity	name:Synonym:nitric oxide synthase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of nitric oxide synthase.
0030337	name:Name:DNA polymerase processivity factor activity	name:Synonym:processivity clamp	name:Synonym:sliding clamp	info:Definition:An enzyme regulator activity that increases the processivity of polymerization by DNA polymerase, by allowing the polymerase to move rapidly along DNA while remaining topologically bound to it.
0035033	name:Name:histone deacetylase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of histone deacetylase.
0035034	name:Name:histone acetyltransferase regulator activity	name:Synonym:histone acetylase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of histone acetyltransferase.
0042349	name:Name:guiding stereospecific synthesis activity	name:Synonym:dirigent protein	info:Definition:The orientation of free radical substrates in such a way that only a particular stereoisomer is synthesized by an enzyme. Best characterized as a function during lignan biosynthesis.
0042979	name:Name:ornithine decarboxylase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulation of the activity of the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase.
0043028	name:Name:caspase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a caspase, any of a group of cysteine proteases involved in apoptosis.
0008656	name:Name:caspase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the rate of proteolysis catalyzed by a caspase.
0043027	name:Name:caspase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a caspase, any of a group of cysteine proteases involved in apoptosis.
0043763	name:Name:UTP:glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase regulator activity	name:Synonym:glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase regulator activity	name:Synonym:UDP-glucose diphosphorylase regulator activity	name:Synonym:UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of UTP:glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase.
0048270	name:Name:methionine adenosyltransferase regulator activity	name:Synonym:MAT regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of methionine adenosyltransferase.
0055103	name:Name:ligase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a ligase.
0055106	name:Name:ubiquitin-protein ligase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a ubiquitin-protein ligase, an enzyme that catalyzes the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to lysine in a substrate protein.
0097027	name:Name:ubiquitin-protein ligase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a ubiquitin-protein ligase, an enzyme that catalyzes the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to lysine in a substrate protein.
0060308	name:Name:GTP cyclohydrolase I regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of GTP cyclohydrolase I. GTP cyclohydrolase I activity catalyzes the reaction: GTP + 2 H2O = formate + 2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-(erythro-1,2,3-trihydroxypropyl)-dihydropteridine triphosphate.
0060589	name:Name:nucleoside-triphosphatase regulator activity	name:Synonym:NTPase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the rate of NTP hydrolysis by a NTPase.
0030695	name:Name:GTPase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the rate of GTP hydrolysis by a GTPase.
0005083	name:Name:small GTPase regulator activity	name:Synonym:small GTPase regulatory/interacting protein activity	info:Definition:Modulates the rate of GTP hydrolysis by a small monomeric GTPase.
0005085	name:Name:guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor activity	name:Synonym:GDP-dissociation stimulator activity	name:Synonym:GDS	name:Synonym:GEF	name:Synonym:GNRP	name:Synonym:guanyl-nucleotide release factor activity	name:Synonym:guanyl-nucleotide releasing factor	info:Definition:Stimulates the exchange of guanyl nucleotides associated with a GTPase. Under normal cellular physiological conditions, the concentration of GTP is higher than that of GDP, favoring the replacement of GDP by GTP in association with the GTPase.
0060590	name:Name:ATPase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the rate of ATP hydrolysis by an ATPase.
0000774	name:Name:adenyl-nucleotide exchange factor activity	info:Definition:Stimulates the hydrolysis and exchange of adenyl nucleotides by other proteins.
0061134	name:Name:peptidase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a peptidase, any enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis peptide bonds.
0061135	name:Name:endopeptidase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of a peptidase, any enzyme that hydrolyzes nonterminal peptide bonds in polypeptides.
0070917	name:Name:inositol phosphoceramide synthase regulator activity	name:Synonym:IPC synthase regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of inositol phosphoceramide synthase.
0072586	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) regulator activity	info:Definition:Modulates the activity of ATP-hydrolyzing DNA topoisomerase. DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) regulator activity catalyzes a DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving a pair of complementary DNA strands to form a gate through which a second double-stranded DNA segment is passed, after which the severed strands in the first DNA segment are rejoined; product release is coupled to ATP binding and hydrolysis; changes the linking number in multiples of 2.
0030545	name:Name:receptor regulator activity	info:Definition:The function of interacting (directly or indirectly) with receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is changed.
0030546	name:Name:receptor activator activity	info:Definition:The function of interacting (directly or indirectly) with receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is increased.
0010861	name:Name:thyroid hormone receptor activator activity	info:Definition:A receptor activator activity that binds to, thyroid hormone receptor in a ligand-dependent manner and enhances ligand-induced transcriptional activity of the receptor.
0030375	name:Name:thyroid hormone receptor coactivator activity	name:Synonym:thyroid hormone receptor co-activator activity	info:Definition:The function of a transcription cofactor that activates transcription in conjuction with a thyroid hormone-dependent nuclear receptor from a RNA polymerase II promoter; does not bind DNA itself.
0030297	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase activator activity	info:Definition:Increases the activity of a transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase.
0030549	name:Name:acetylcholine receptor activator activity	info:Definition:Interacting (directly or indirectly) with acetylcholine receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is increased.
0071884	name:Name:vitamin D receptor activator activity	info:Definition:Interacting (directly or indirectly) with vitamin D receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is increased.
0030547	name:Name:receptor inhibitor activity	info:Definition:The function of interacting (directly or indirectly) with receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is decreased.
0030293	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Stops, prevents or reduces the activity of a transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase.
0030550	name:Name:acetylcholine receptor inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Interacting (directly or indirectly) with acetylcholine receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is decreased.
0030548	name:Name:acetylcholine receptor regulator activity	info:Definition:Interacting (directly or indirectly) with acetylcholine receptors such that the proportion of receptors in the active form is changed.
0031386	name:Name:protein tag	name:Synonym:covalent modifier	name:Synonym:protein tagging activity	name:Synonym:ubiquitin	info:Definition:Acting as an indicator or marker to facilitate recognition by other molecules in the cell. Recognition of the tag, which can be covalently attached to the target molecule, may result in modification, sequestration, transport or degradation of the molecule in question.
0042056	name:Name:chemoattractant activity	name:Synonym:attractant	info:Definition:Providing the environmental signal that initiates the directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a higher concentration of that signal.
0045182	name:Name:translation regulator activity	name:Synonym:translation factor activity	info:Definition:Any molecular function involved in the initiation, activation, perpetuation, repression or termination of polypeptide synthesis at the ribosome.
0030371	name:Name:translation repressor activity	info:Definition:Antagonizes ribosome-mediated translation of mRNA into a polypeptide.
0000901	name:Name:translation repressor activity, non-nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:Antagonizes the ribosome-mediated translation of mRNA into a polypeptide but does not bind directly to nucleic acid.
0045183	name:Name:translation factor activity, non-nucleic acid binding	info:Definition:A translation regulator activity that does not involve binding to nucleic acids.
0045499	name:Name:chemorepellent activity	name:Synonym:chemorepellant activity	info:Definition:Providing the environmental signal that initiates the directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a lower concentration of that signal.
0045735	name:Name:nutrient reservoir activity	name:Synonym:storage protein	name:Synonym:storage protein of fat body	name:Synonym:yolk protein	info:Definition:Functions in the storage of nutritious substrates.
0060089	name:Name:molecular transducer activity	info:Definition:The molecular function that accepts an input of one form and creates an output of a different form.
0004871	name:Name:signal transducer activity	name:Synonym:hematopoietin/interferon-class (D200-domain) cytokine receptor signal transducer activity	name:Synonym:quorum sensing response regulator activity	name:Synonym:quorum sensing signal generator activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal across a cell to trigger a change in cell function or state. A signal is a physical entity or change in state that is used to transfer information in order to trigger a response.
0000155	name:Name:two-component sensor activity	name:Synonym:two-component sensor molecule	name:Synonym:two-component system sensor activity 	info:Definition:Catalysis of the phosphorylation of a histidine residue in response to detection of an extracellular signal such as a chemical ligand or change in environment, to initiate a change in cell state or activity. The two-component sensor is a histidine kinase that autophosphorylates a histidine residue in its active site. The phosphate is then transferred to an aspartate residue in a downstream response regulator, to trigger a response.
0000156	name:Name:two-component response regulator activity	info:Definition:Responds to a two-component sensor to initiate a change in cell state or activity. The activity of the response regulator is regulated by transfer of a phosphate from a histidine residue in the sensor, to an aspartate residue in the response regulator. Many but not all response regulators act as transcriptional regulators to elicit a response.
0005057	name:Name:receptor signaling protein activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling protein activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal from an upstream receptor or intracellular signal transducer, converting the signal into a form where it can ultimately trigger a change in the state or activity of a cell.
0004702	name:Name:receptor signaling protein serine/threonine kinase activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling protein serine/threonine kinase activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal from an upstream receptor or intracellular signal transducer by catalysis of the reaction: ATP protein serine = ADP + protein serine phosphate, and ATP + protein threonine = ADP + protein threonine phosphate.
0004716	name:Name:receptor signaling protein tyrosine kinase activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling protein tyrosine kinase activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal from an upstream receptor or intracellular signal transducer by catalysis of the reaction: ATP + a protein-L-tyrosine = ADP + a protein-L-tyrosine phosphate.
0004728	name:Name:receptor signaling protein tyrosine phosphatase activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling protein tyrosine phosphatase activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal from an upstream receptor or intracellular signal transducer by catalysis of the reaction: protein tyrosine phosphate + H2O = protein tyrosine + phosphate.
0005072	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta receptor, cytoplasmic mediator activity	name:Synonym:TGF-beta receptor, cytoplasmic mediator activity	name:Synonym:TGFbeta receptor, cytoplasmic mediator activity	info:Definition:Activity of any of the molecules that transmit the signal from a TGF-beta receptor through the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
0009400	name:Name:receptor signaling protein serine/threonine phosphatase activity	name:Synonym:receptor signalling protein serine/threonine phosphatase activity	info:Definition:Conveys a signal from an upstream receptor or intracellular signal transducer by catalysis of the reaction: protein serine phosphate + H2O = protein serine + phosphate, and protein threonine phosphate + H2O = protein threonine + phosphate.
0009927	name:Name:histidine phosphotransfer kinase activity	info:Definition:Serves as a phospho-His intermediate enabling the transfer of phospho group between a hybrid kinase and a response regulator.
0031992	name:Name:energy transducer activity	name:Synonym:light harvesting activity	name:Synonym:photon capture	info:Definition:The biological transducer activity that accepts energy and converts it to another form, often by transfer to another molecule within the cell.
0031993	name:Name:light transducer activity	info:Definition:Absorbing energy from one or more photons and transferring their energy to another molecule, usually a protein, within the cell.
0005575	name:Name:cellular_component	name:Synonym:cellular component	name:Synonym:cellular component unknown	info:Definition:The part of a cell or its extracellular environment in which a gene product is located. A gene product may be located in one or more parts of a cell and its location may be as specific as a particular macromolecular complex, that is, a stable, persistent association of macromolecules that function together.
0005576	name:Name:extracellular region	name:Synonym:extracellular	info:Definition:The space external to the outermost structure of a cell. For cells without external protective or external encapsulating structures this refers to space outside of the plasma membrane. This term covers the host cell environment outside an intracellular parasite.
0048046	name:Name:apoplast	info:Definition:The cell membranes and intracellular regions in a plant are connected through plasmodesmata, and plants may be described as having two major compartments: the living symplast and the non-living apoplast. The apoplast is external to the plasma membrane and includes cell walls, intercellular spaces and the lumen of dead structures such as xylem vessels. Water and solutes pass freely through it.
0005623	name:Name:cell	info:Definition:The basic structural and functional unit of all organisms. Includes the plasma membrane and any external encapsulating structures such as the cell wall and cell envelope.
0019012	name:Name:virion	name:Synonym:complete virus particle	info:Definition:The complete fully infectious extracellular virus particle.
0030054	name:Name:cell junction	info:Definition:A plasma membrane part that forms a specialized region of connection between two cells or between a cell and the extracellular matrix. At a cell junction, anchoring proteins extend through the plasma membrane to link cytoskeletal proteins in one cell to cytoskeletal proteins in neighboring cells or to proteins in the extracellular matrix.
0005911	name:Name:cell-cell junction	name:Synonym:intercellular junction	info:Definition:A cell junction that forms a connection between two cells; excludes direct cytoplasmic junctions such as ring canals.
0005913	name:Name:cell-cell adherens junction	info:Definition:An adherens junction which connects two cells to each other.
0005914	name:Name:spot adherens junction	name:Synonym:dense plaque	name:Synonym:punctum adherens	info:Definition:A small junction assembled during the cellularization stage of insect embyrogenesis; spot adherens junctions later fuse to form the zonula adherens.
0005915	name:Name:zonula adherens	name:Synonym:adhesion belt	name:Synonym:belt desmosome	name:Synonym:fascia adhaerens	name:Synonym:intermediate junction	name:Synonym:zonula adhaerens	info:Definition:A cell-cell adherens junction which forms a continuous belt near the apex of epithelial cells.
0005916	name:Name:fascia adherens	info:Definition:A cell-cell junction that contains the transmembrane protein N-cadherin, which interacts with identical molecules from neighboring cells to form a tight mechanical intercellular link; forms a large portion of the intercalated disc, the structure at which myofibrils terminate in cardiomyocytes.
0005917	name:Name:nephrocyte junction	info:Definition:A tissue-specific adherens junction found between nephrocyte cells. A nephrocyte is an insect excretory cell that regulates hemolymph composition by filtration and filtrate endocytosis.
0005921	name:Name:gap junction	name:Synonym:communicating junction	name:Synonym:macula communicans	name:Synonym:zonula communicans	info:Definition:A cell-cell junction that is composed of an array of small channels that permit small molecules to pass from one cell to another. At gap junctions, the membranes of two adjacent cells are separated by a uniform narrow gap of about 2-4 nm that is spanned by channel-forming proteins called connexins, which form hexagonal tubes called connexons.
0009506	name:Name:plasmodesma	name:Synonym:plasmodesmata	info:Definition:A fine cytoplasmic channel, found in all higher plants, that connects the cytoplasm of one cell to that of an adjacent cell.
0009550	name:Name:primary plasmodesma	name:Synonym:simple plasmodesma	info:Definition:A plasmodesma that consists of a simple, single channel; found predominantly in young tissue and formed as a function of cell plate formation during cytokinesis.
0009551	name:Name:secondary plasmodesma	info:Definition:A plasmodesma with a branched structure, often with many channels leading into a larger central cavity; found in older tissues and usually derived from preexisting primary plasmodesmata.
0030057	name:Name:desmosome	name:Synonym:macula adherens	name:Synonym:spot desmosome	info:Definition:A cell-cell junction in which: on the cytoplasmic surface of each interacting plasma membrane is a dense plaque composed of a mixture of intracellular anchor proteins; a bundle of keratin intermediate filaments is attached to the surface of each plaque; transmembrane adhesion proteins of the cadherin family bind to the plaques and interact through their extracellular domains to hold the adjacent membranes together by a Ca2+-dependent mechanism.
0033010	name:Name:paranodal junction	info:Definition:A highly specialized cell-cell junction found in vertebrates, which forms between a neuron and a glial cell, and has structural similarity to Drosophila septate junctions. It flanks the node of Ranvier in myelinated nerve and electrically isolates the myelinated from unmyelinated nerve segments and physically separates the voltage-gated sodium channels at the node from the cluster of potassium channels underneath the myelin sheath.
0043296	name:Name:apical junction complex	name:Synonym:apical cell junction complex	info:Definition:A functional unit located near the cell apex at the points of contact between epithelial cells, which in vertebrates is composed of the tight junction, the zonula adherens, and desmosomes and in invertebrates is composed of the subapical complex (SAC), the zonula adherens and the septate junction. Functions in the regulation of cell polarity, tissue integrity and intercellular adhesion and permeability.
0044291	name:Name:cell-cell contact zone	name:Synonym:cell cell contact zone	info:Definition:Extended zone of intimate apposition between two cells containing one or more types of intercellular junctions, e.g., the intercalated disk of muscle.
0014704	name:Name:intercalated disc	name:Synonym:intercalated disk	info:Definition:A complex cell-cell junction at which myofibrils terminate in cardiomyocytes; mediates mechanical and electrochemical integration between individual cardiomyocytes. The intercalated disc contains regions of tight mechanical attachment (fasciae adherentes and desmosomes) and electrical coupling (gap junctions) between adjacent cells.
0044286	name:Name:peg and socket contact	name:Synonym:ball and socket contact	info:Definition:A cell-cell contact zone that consists of membrane invaginations extending from either cell, which contain tight-, gap-, and adherens junctions. Peg and socket contacts form between endothelial cells and pericytes, and between lens fiber cells.
0046581	name:Name:intercellular canaliculus	info:Definition:An extremely narrow tubular channel located between adjacent cells. An instance of this is the secretory canaliculi occurring between adjacent parietal cells in the gastric mucosa of vertebrates.
0070160	name:Name:occluding junction	name:Synonym:occluding cell junction	info:Definition:A cell-cell junction that seals cells together in an epithelium in a way that prevents even small molecules from leaking from one side of the sheet to the other.
0005918	name:Name:septate junction	name:Synonym:septate desmosome	info:Definition:A cell-cell junction that forms a continuous band around each cell in an epithelium; within the septate junction the membranes of adjacent cells maintain a constant distance of approximately 15 nm; found in invertebrates.
0005923	name:Name:tight junction	name:Synonym:zonula occludens	info:Definition:An occluding cell-cell junction that is composed of a branching network of sealing strands that completely encircles the apical end of each cell in an epithelial sheet; the outer leaflets of the two interacting plasma membranes are seen to be tightly apposed where sealing strands are present. Each sealing strand is composed of a long row of transmembrane adhesion proteins embedded in each of the two interacting plasma membranes.
0030055	name:Name:cell-substrate junction	name:Synonym:cell-matrix junction	info:Definition:A cell junction that forms a connection between a cell and the extracellular matrix.
0005924	name:Name:cell-substrate adherens junction	name:Synonym:hemi-adherens junction	info:Definition:An adherens junction which connects a cell to the extracellular matrix.
0005925	name:Name:focal adhesion	name:Synonym:focal contact	name:Synonym:hemi-adherens junction	info:Definition:Small region on the surface of a cell that anchors the cell to the extracellular matrix and that forms a point of termination of actin filaments.
0005926	name:Name:connecting hemi-adherens junction	info:Definition:A cell-substrate adherens junction, also known as a hemiadherens junction (HAJ) that forms one of a pair of junctions in opposing cells that are separated by only 30-40nm, with a thin line of extracellular electron-dense material in between; found where muscles attach to epidermal cells directly (in insects).
0005927	name:Name:muscle tendon junction	name:Synonym:myotendinous junction	info:Definition:A cell-substrate junction found at the terminal anchorage site of skeletal muscle cells to tendons.
0005928	name:Name:apical hemi-adherens junction	name:Synonym:apical cell-substrate adherens junction	name:Synonym:apical dense plaque	info:Definition:A cell-substrate adherens junction found in the apical region of a cell, such as those found in cuticle-secreting epithelia, which connect the apical membrane to the cuticle.
0030056	name:Name:hemidesmosome	name:Synonym:hemi-adherens junction	info:Definition:A cell-substrate junction that forms a point of contact between the basal surface of epithelial cells and the basal lamina. Morphologically resembles desmosomes; attached to intermediate filaments.
0070161	name:Name:anchoring junction	name:Synonym:anchoring cell junction	info:Definition:A cell junction that mechanically attaches a cell (and its cytoskeleton) to neighboring cells or to the extracellular matrix.
0005912	name:Name:adherens junction	info:Definition:A cell junction at which anchoring proteins (cadherins or integrins) extend through the plasma membrane and are attached to actin filaments.
0031974	name:Name:membrane-enclosed lumen	info:Definition:The enclosed volume within a sealed membrane or between two sealed membranes. Encompasses the volume enclosed by the membranes of a particular organelle, e.g. endoplasmic reticulum lumen, or the space between the two lipid bilayers of a double membrane surrounding an organelle, e.g. nuclear envelope lumen.
0031970	name:Name:organelle envelope lumen	name:Synonym:organelle intermembrane space	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers of an organelle envelope.
0005641	name:Name:nuclear envelope lumen	name:Synonym:nuclear intermembrane space	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane lumen	name:Synonym:perinuclear space	info:Definition:The region between the two lipid bilayers of the nuclear envelope; 20-40 nm wide.
0005758	name:Name:mitochondrial intermembrane space	name:Synonym:mitochondrial envelope lumen	name:Synonym:mitochondrial membrane lumen	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers of the mitochondrial envelope.
0009529	name:Name:plastid intermembrane space	name:Synonym:plastid envelope lumen	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers of the plastid envelope.
0031972	name:Name:chloroplast intermembrane space	name:Synonym:chloroplast envelope lumen	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers of a chloroplast envelope.
0031973	name:Name:chromoplast intermembrane space	name:Synonym:chromoplast envelope lumen	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers of a chromoplast envelope.
0043233	name:Name:organelle lumen	info:Definition:The internal volume enclosed by the membranes of a particular organelle; includes the volume enclosed by a single organelle membrane, e.g. endoplasmic reticulum lumen, or the volume enclosed by the innermost of the two lipid bilayers of an organelle envelope, e.g. nuclear lumen.
0031983	name:Name:vesicle lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membrane or protein that forms a vesicle.
0060205	name:Name:cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicle lumen	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic membrane-enclosed vesicle lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membrane of a cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicle.
0034591	name:Name:rhoptry lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the rhoptry membrane.
0070013	name:Name:intracellular organelle lumen	info:Definition:An organelle lumen that is part of an intracellular organelle.
0005759	name:Name:mitochondrial matrix	name:Synonym:mitochondrial lumen	name:Synonym:mitochondrial stroma	info:Definition:The gel-like material, with considerable fine structure, that lies in the matrix space, or lumen, of a mitochondrion. It contains the enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and, in some organisms, the enzymes concerned with fatty acid oxidation.
0005775	name:Name:vacuolar lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed within the vacuolar membrane.
0005788	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum lumen	name:Synonym:cisternal lumen	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum cisterna	name:Synonym:ER cisterna	name:Synonym:ER lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum.
0005796	name:Name:Golgi lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membranes of any cisterna or subcompartment of the Golgi apparatus, including the cis- and trans-Golgi networks.
0031096	name:Name:platelet dense tubular network lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membranes of the platelet dense tubular network.
0031904	name:Name:endosome lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membrane of an endosome.
0031907	name:Name:microbody lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membranes of a microbody.
0031981	name:Name:nuclear lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the nuclear inner membrane.
0033985	name:Name:acidocalcisome lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membranes of an acidocalcisome.
0034492	name:Name:hydrogenosome lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the hydrogenosome membrane.
0034494	name:Name:microneme lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the microneme membrane.
0032991	name:Name:macromolecular complex	name:Synonym:macromolecule complex	info:Definition:A stable assembly of two or more macromolecules, i.e. proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates or lipids, in which the constituent parts function together.
0001114	name:Name:protein-DNA-RNA complex	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex containing protein, DNA, and RNA molecules.
0030529	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:protein-RNA complex	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein	name:Synonym:RNA-protein complex	name:Synonym:RNP	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex containing both protein and RNA molecules.
0005681	name:Name:spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:spliceosome complex	info:Definition:Any of a series of ribonucleoprotein complexes that contain RNA and small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), and are formed sequentially during the splicing of a messenger RNA primary transcript to excise an intron.
0005684	name:Name:U2-type spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:GT-AG spliceosome	name:Synonym:major (U2-type) spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:major spliceosomal complex	info:Definition:Any spliceosomal complex that forms during the splicing of a messenger RNA primary transcript to excise an intron that has canonical consensus sequences near the 5' and 3' ends.
0005689	name:Name:U12-type spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:AT-AC spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:minor (U12-type) spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:minor spliceosomal complex	info:Definition:Any spliceosomal complex that forms during the splicing of a messenger RNA primary transcript to excise an intron; the series of U12-type spliceosomal complexes is involved in the splicing of the majority of introns that contain atypical AT-AC terminal dinucleotides, as well as other non-canonical introns. The entire splice site signal, not just the terminal dinucleotides, is involved in determining which spliceosome utilizes the site.
0071010	name:Name:prespliceosome	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex A	name:Synonym:yeast spliceosomal complex B	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that is formed by association of the 5' splice site and the branch point sequence with specific snRNPs. The prespliceosome includes many proteins in addition to those found in the bound snRNPs. Commitment to a given pair of 5' and 3' splice sites occurs at the time of prespliceosome formation.
0071011	name:Name:precatalytic spliceosome	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex B	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex B1	name:Synonym:yeast spliceosomal complex A2-1	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that is formed by the recruitment of a preassembled U5-containing tri-snRNP to the prespliceosome. Although all 5 snRNPs are present, the precatalytic spliceosome is catalytically inactive. The precatalytic spliceosome includes many proteins in addition to those found in the associated snRNPs.
0071012	name:Name:catalytic step 1 spliceosome	name:Synonym:activated spliceosome	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex B*	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex B2	name:Synonym:yeast spliceosomal complex A1	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that is formed by the displacement of the two snRNPs from the precatalytic spliceosome; three snRNPs including U5 remain associated with the mRNA. This complex, sometimes called the activated spliceosome, is the catalytically active form of the spliceosome, and includes many proteins in addition to those found in the associated snRNPs.
0071013	name:Name:catalytic step 2 spliceosome	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex C	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex C1	name:Synonym:yeast spliceosomal complex A2-2	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that contains three snRNPs, including U5, bound to a splicing intermediate in which the first catalytic cleavage of the 5' splice site has occurred. The precise subunit composition differs significantly from that of the catalytic step 1, or activated, spliceosome, and includes many proteins in addition to those found in the associated snRNPs.
0071014	name:Name:post-mRNA release spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex I	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that is formed following the release of the spliced product from the post-spliceosomal complex and contains the excised intron and three snRNPs, including U5.
0071020	name:Name:post-spliceosomal complex	name:Synonym:mammalian spliceosomal complex C2	name:Synonym:yeast spliceosomal complex A2-3	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that is formed following the second splicing event and contains the spliced product, the excised intron, and three snRNPs, including U5.
0071023	name:Name:trans spliceosomal complex	info:Definition:A spliceosomal complex that forms during the addition of a specific spliced leader (SL) sequence to the 5'-end of a messenger RNA primary transcript, a process which occurs in a number of eukaryotic organisms, including trypanosomatid protozoans, euglenoids, nematodes, trematodes, and chordates.
0005697	name:Name:telomerase holoenzyme complex	info:Definition:Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme complex, with a minimal catalytic core composed of a catalytic reverse transcriptase subunit and an RNA subunit that provides the template for telomeric DNA addition. In vivo, the holoenzyme complex often contains additional subunits.
0000333	name:Name:telomerase catalytic core complex	info:Definition:The minimal catalytic core of telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex composed of a catalytic reverse transcriptase subunit and an RNA subunit that provides the template for telomeric DNA addition.
0005732	name:Name:small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein	name:Synonym:snoRNP	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains an RNA molecule of the small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) family and associated proteins. Most are involved in a step of processing of rRNA: cleavage, 2'-O-methylation, or pseudouridylation. The majority, though not all, fall into one of two classes, box C/D type or box H/ACA type.
0000172	name:Name:ribonuclease MRP complex	name:Synonym:ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA processing complex	name:Synonym:RNase MRP complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains an RNA molecule of the snoRNA family, and cleaves the rRNA precursor as part of rRNA transcript processing. It also has other roles: In S. cerevisiae it is involved in cell cycle-regulated degradation of daughter cell-specific mRNAs, while in mammalian cells it also enters the mitochondria and processes RNAs to create RNA primers for DNA replication.
0031428	name:Name:box C/D snoRNP complex	name:Synonym:box C/D snoRNP ribose 2'-O methylase complex	name:Synonym:box C/D snoRNP ribose-2'-O-methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex containing small nucleolar RNA of the box C/D type that can carry out ribose-2'-O-methylation of target RNAs.
0072588	name:Name:box H/ACA RNP complex	name:Synonym:box H/ACA snoRNP pseudouridylase complex	name:Synonym:sRNP complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains an RNA of the box H/ACA type, a subtype of the small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) family. RNA pseudouridylation (isomerization of uridine to pseudouridine) is the major, and most likely the ancestral, function of H/ACA RNPs, although some have evolved other functions. Pseudouridylation targets include both large and small ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), and on U2 small nuclear RNA (U2 snRNA).
0005840	name:Name:ribosome	name:Synonym:ribosomal RNA	name:Synonym:ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:An intracellular organelle, about 200 A in diameter, consisting of RNA and protein. It is the site of protein biosynthesis resulting from translation of messenger RNA (mRNA). It consists of two subunits, one large and one small, each containing only protein and RNA. Both the ribosome and its subunits are characterized by their sedimentation coefficients, expressed in Svedberg units (symbol: S). Hence, the prokaryotic ribosome (70S) comprises a large (50S) subunit and a small (30S) subunit, while the eukaryotic ribosome (80S) comprises a large (60S) subunit and a small (40S) subunit. Two sites on the ribosomal large subunit are involved in translation, namely the aminoacyl site (A site) and peptidyl site (P site). Ribosomes from prokaryotes, eukaryotes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts have characteristically distinct ribosomal proteins.
0000313	name:Name:organellar ribosome	info:Definition:A ribosome contained within a subcellular membrane-bounded organelle.
0022626	name:Name:cytosolic ribosome	name:Synonym:70S ribosome	name:Synonym:80S ribosome	info:Definition:A ribosome located in the cytosol.
0042788	name:Name:polysomal ribosome	name:Synonym:active ribosome	info:Definition:A ribosome bound to mRNA that forms part of a polysome.
0005844	name:Name:polysome	name:Synonym:polyribosome	info:Definition:Several ribosomes bound to one mRNA.
0015934	name:Name:large ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:ribosomal large subunit	info:Definition:The larger of the two subunits of a ribosome. Two sites on the ribosomal large subunit are involved in translation, namely the aminoacyl site (A site) and peptidyl site (P site).
0000315	name:Name:organellar large ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The larger of the two subunits of an organellar ribosome. Two sites on the ribosomal large subunit are involved in translation: the aminoacyl site (A site) and peptidyl site (P site).
0022625	name:Name:cytosolic large ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:50S ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:60S ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:eukaryotic ribosomal LSU	name:Synonym:prokaryotic large ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The large subunit of a ribosome located in the cytosol.
0015935	name:Name:small ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:ribosomal small subunit	info:Definition:The smaller of the two subunits of a ribosome.
0000314	name:Name:organellar small ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The smaller of the two subunits of an organellar ribosome.
0022627	name:Name:cytosolic small ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:30S ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:40S ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:eukaryotic ribosomal SSU	name:Synonym:prokaryotic small ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The small subunit of a ribosome located in the cytosol.
0016456	name:Name:X chromosome located dosage compensation complex, transcription activating	name:Synonym:dosage compensation complex	info:Definition:An RNA-protein complex localized to the X chromosome of males where it is required for the hyper-transcriptional activation of the X chromosome. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030530	name:Name:heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein	name:Synonym:hnRNP	info:Definition:Particulate complex of heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA; a heterogeneous mixture of RNA molecules of high Mr with a rapid turnover rate that occurs in cell nuclei during protein synthesis; it is the form of RNA synthesized in eukaryotes by RNA polymerase II, that which is translated into protein) with protein, which is cell-specific and heterogeneous. The protein component may play a role in the processing of the hnRNA to mRNA.
0030531	name:Name:small cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:scRNP	name:Synonym:small cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein	info:Definition:A complex composed of RNA of the small cytoplasmic RNA (scRNA) class and protein, found in the cytoplasm.
0030532	name:Name:small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:small nuclear ribonucleoprotein	name:Synonym:snRNP	info:Definition:A complex composed of RNA of the small nuclear RNA (snRNA) class and protein, found in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell. These are typically named after the snRNA(s) they contain, e.g. U1 snRNP or U4/U6 snRNP. Many, but not all, of these complexes are involved in splicing of nuclear mRNAs.
0005682	name:Name:U5 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U5	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U5.
0005683	name:Name:U7 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U7	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains the U7 snRNA and is required for the 3'-end processing of replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs.
0005685	name:Name:U1 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U1	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U1.
0005686	name:Name:U2 snRNP	name:Synonym:17S U2 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U2	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U2.
0005687	name:Name:U4 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U4	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U4.
0005688	name:Name:U6 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U6	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U6.
0005690	name:Name:U4atac snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U4atac	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U4atac.
0005691	name:Name:U6atac snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U6atac	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U6atac.
0005692	name:Name:U11 snRNP	name:Synonym:12S U11 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U11	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U11.
0005693	name:Name:U12 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U12	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains small nuclear RNA U12.
0034693	name:Name:U11/U12 snRNP	name:Synonym:18S U11/U12 snRNP	name:Synonym:snRNP U11/U12	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex formed by the association of the U11 and U12 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins.
0046540	name:Name:U4/U6 x U5 tri-snRNP complex	name:Synonym:U4/U6.U5 snRNP complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex formed by the association of the U4/U6 and U5 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins.
0071001	name:Name:U4/U6 snRNP	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains base-paired U4 and U6 small nuclear RNAs.
0071002	name:Name:U4atac/U6atac snRNP	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains base-paired U4atac and U6atac small nuclear RNAs.
0071003	name:Name:penta-snRNP complex	name:Synonym:penta-RNP complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex formed by the association of the U1, U2, U4/U6 and U5 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins.
0071009	name:Name:U4atac/U6atac x U5 tri-snRNP complex	name:Synonym:U4atac/U6atac.U5 snRNP complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex formed by the association of the U4atac/U6atac and U5 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins.
0071024	name:Name:SL snRNP	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains spliced leader (SL) RNA.
0030677	name:Name:ribonuclease P complex	name:Synonym:RNase P complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that catalyzes cleavage of the leader sequence of precursor tRNAs (pre-tRNAs), generating the mature 5' end of tRNAs.
0030678	name:Name:mitochondrial ribonuclease P complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial RNase P complex	info:Definition:A ribonuclease P complex located in the mitochondrion of a eukaryotic cell, where it catalyzes the 5' endonucleolytic cleavage of precursor tRNAs to yield mature tRNAs. The subunit composition of mitochondrial ribonuclease P complexes varies between species, but the complex often contains a single RNA molecule and a single protein molecule.
0030680	name:Name:dimeric ribonuclease P complex	name:Synonym:dimeric RNase P complex	info:Definition:A ribonuclease P complex that contains a single RNA molecule that is necessary and usually sufficient for catalysis, and a single protein molecule. Examples of this complex are found in Bacterial species.
0030681	name:Name:multimeric ribonuclease P complex	name:Synonym:multimeric RNase P complex	info:Definition:A ribonuclease P complex that generally contains a single RNA molecule and several protein molecules. Examples of this complex are found in Archaeal species.
0030684	name:Name:preribosome	info:Definition:Any complex of pre-rRNAs, ribosomal proteins, and associated proteins formed during ribosome biogenesis.
0030685	name:Name:nucleolar preribosome	info:Definition:Any complex of pre-rRNAs, ribosomal proteins, and associated proteins formed in the nucleolus during ribosome biogenesis.
0030686	name:Name:90S preribosome	info:Definition:A large ribonucleoprotein complex considered to be the earliest preribosomal complex. In S. cerevisiae, it has a size of 90S and consists of the 35S pre-rRNA, early-associating ribosomal proteins most of which are part of the small ribosomal subunit, the U3 snoRNA and associated proteins.
0030687	name:Name:preribosome, large subunit precursor	name:Synonym:66S preribosome	info:Definition:A preribosomal complex consisting of 27SA, 27SB, and/or 7S pre-rRNA, 5S rRNA, ribosomal proteins including late-associating large subunit proteins, and associated proteins; a precursor of the eukaryotic cytoplasmic large ribosomal subunit.
0030688	name:Name:preribosome, small subunit precursor	name:Synonym:43S preribosome	info:Definition:A preribosomal complex consisting of 20S pre-rRNA, ribosomal proteins including late-associating small subunit proteins, and associated proteins; a precursor of the eukaryotic cytoplasmic small ribosomal subunit.
0032040	name:Name:small-subunit processome	name:Synonym:small subunit processome	name:Synonym:SSU processome	info:Definition:A large ribonucleoprotein complex that is an early preribosomal complex. In S. cerevisiae, it has a size of 80S and consists of the 35S pre-rRNA, early-associating ribosomal proteins most of which are part of the small ribosomal subunit, the U3 snoRNA and associated proteins.
0031332	name:Name:RNAi effector complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that mediates the effects of small interfering RNAs on gene expression. Most known examples contain one or more members of the Argonaute family of proteins.
0016442	name:Name:RNA-induced silencing complex	name:Synonym:RISC complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains members of the Argonaute family of proteins, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or microRNAs (miRNAs), and miRNA or siRNA-complementary mRNAs, in addition to a number of accessory factors. The RISC complex is involved in posttranscriptional repression of gene expression through downregulation of translation or induction of mRNA degradation.
0030958	name:Name:RITS complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for heterochromatin assembly; contains an Argonaute homolog, a chromodomain protein, and at least one additional protein; named for RNA-induced initiation of transcriptional gene silencing.
0033167	name:Name:ARC complex	name:Synonym:argonaute siRNA chaperone complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains members of the Argonaute family of proteins, additional protein subunits, and duplex siRNA; required for heterochromatin assembly and siRNA generation. Possibly involved in the conversion of ds siRNA to ss siRNA.
0035068	name:Name:micro-ribonucleoprotein complex	name:Synonym:miRNP complex	info:Definition:A complex containing both protein and micro-RNA (miRNA) molecules. miRNAs are approximately 22 nucleotide noncoding RNAs derived from endogenous genes; they are processed from the stem of a longer hairpin like structure termed a pre-miRNA.
0035770	name:Name:RNA granule	info:Definition:A non-membranous macromolecular complex containing proteins and translationally silenced mRNAs. RNA granules contain proteins that control the localization, stability, and translation of their RNA cargo. Different types of RNA granules (RGs) exist, depending on the cell type and cellular conditions.
0000932	name:Name:cytoplasmic mRNA processing body	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic foci	name:Synonym:P body	name:Synonym:P-body	info:Definition:A focus in the cytoplasm where mRNAs may become inactivated by decapping or some other mechanism. mRNA processing and binding proteins are localized to these foci.
0010494	name:Name:stress granule	info:Definition:A dense aggregation in the cytosol composed of proteins and RNAs that appear when the cell is under stress.
0033391	name:Name:chromatoid body	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex found in the cytoplasm of male germ cells, composed of exceedingly thin filaments that are consolidated into a compact mass or into dense strands of varying thickness that branch to form an irregular network. Contains mRNAs, miRNAs, and protein components involved in miRNA processing (such as Argonaute proteins and the endonuclease Dicer) and in RNA decay (such as the decapping enzyme DCP1a and GW182).
0043186	name:Name:P granule	name:Synonym:germline granule	name:Synonym:nuage	name:Synonym:polar granule	info:Definition:A small cytoplasmic, non-membranous RNA/protein complex aggregates in the primordial germ cells of many higher eukaryotes.
0071598	name:Name:neuronal RNA granule	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that is found in the cytoplasm of axons and dendrites, and transports translationally silenced mRNAs to dendritic synapses, where they are released and translated in response to specific exogenous stimuli.
0043614	name:Name:multi-eIF complex	name:Synonym:multifactor translation initiation factor (eIF) complex	info:Definition:A multifactor complex composed of multiple translation initiation factors and the initiatior tRNAiMet, which is ready to bind to the small (40S) ribosome to form the 43S preinitiation complex. In S. cerevisiae, this complex is composed of eIF1, eIF2, eIF3, and eIF5.
0044207	name:Name:translation initiation ternary complex	name:Synonym:Met-tRNA/eIF2.GTP ternary complex	name:Synonym:translation initiation (ternary) complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains aminoacylated initiator methionine tRNA, GTP, and initiation factor 2 (either eIF2 in eukaryotes, or IF2 in prokaryotes). In prokaryotes, fMet-tRNA (initiator) is used rather than Met-tRNA (initiator).
0048500	name:Name:signal recognition particle	info:Definition:A complex of protein and RNA which facilitates translocation of proteins across membranes.
0005786	name:Name:signal recognition particle, endoplasmic reticulum targeting	name:Synonym:signal sequence receptor complex	name:Synonym:SRP	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein particle of 325 kDa composed of a 7S (300 nucleotide) RNA molecule and a complex of six different polypeptides. This binds both to the N-terminal signal peptide for proteins destined for the endoplasmic reticulum as they emerge from the large ribosomal subunit and also to the ribosome. This binding arrests further translation thereby preventing the proteins from being released into the cytosol. The SRP-ribosome complex then diffuses to the endoplasmic reticulum where it is bound to the signal recognition particle receptor, which allows resumption of protein synthesis and facilitates the passage of the growing polypeptide chain through the translocon. Through a process involving GTP hydrolysis, the SRP-SRP receptor complex dissociates and SRP returns to the cytosol. Of the six polypeptides of SRP the 54 kDa subunit (SRP54) is the central player. It contains an N-terminal GTPase domain and a C-terminal domain that binds directly to the signal peptide and the SRP RNA. Examples of this component are found in Mus musculus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Arabidopsis thaliana.
0048501	name:Name:signal recognition particle, plasma membrane targeting	info:Definition:A complex consisting of a protein and RNA component which binds the signal sequence of some proteins and facilitates their export to or across the plasma membrane.
0080085	name:Name:signal recognition particle, chloroplast targeting	info:Definition:A complex consisting of a protein and RNA component which binds the signal sequence of some proteins and facilitates their export to the chloroplast.
0070578	name:Name:RISC-loading complex	name:Synonym:microRNA loading complex	name:Synonym:miRLC	name:Synonym:RLC	info:Definition:A trimeric ribonucleoprotein complex that and is required for the formation of a mature RNA induced silencing complex (RISC). In humans the complex is composed of the endonuclease Dicer (DICER1) and TRBP (TARBP2) in association with the Argonaute protein Ago2 (EIF2C2/AGO2). Within the complex, Dicer and TRBP are required to process precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) to mature miRNAs and then load them onto Ago2. Ago2 bound to the mature miRNA constitutes the minimal RISC and may subsequently dissociate from Dicer and TRBP.
0070761	name:Name:pre-snoRNP complex	name:Synonym:pre-small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains a precursor small nucleolar RNA (pre-snoRNA) and associated proteins, and forms during small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex (snoRNP) assembly. Pre-snoRNP complexes may contain proteins not found in the corresponding mature snoRNP complexes.
0070992	name:Name:translation initiation complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains a ribosome, mRNA, and initiator tRNA; the functional ribosome is at the AUG, with the methionyl/formyl-methionyl-tRNA positioned at the P site.
0033291	name:Name:eukaryotic 80S initiation complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of the large and small ribosomal subunits, methionyl-initiatior tRNA, and the capped mRNA. The initiator tRNA is positioned at the ribosomal P site at the AUG codon corresponding to the beginning of the coding region.
0070993	name:Name:translation preinitiation complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that contains the small ribosomal subunit, a translation initiation ternary complex (i.e. an initiator tRNA, GTP, and an IF2 or eIF2 complex), and an mRNA.
0016282	name:Name:eukaryotic 43S preinitiation complex	name:Synonym:eukaryotic 43S pre-initiation complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of the 40S ribosomal subunit plus eIF1A, eIF3, and eIF2-GTP-bound methionyl-initiator methionine tRNA.
0033290	name:Name:eukaryotic 48S preinitiation complex	name:Synonym:eukaryotic 48S initiation complex	name:Synonym:eukaryotic 48S pre-initiation complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of the small ribosomal subunit, eIF3, eIF1A, methionyl-initiatior methionine and a capped mRNA. The complex is initially positioned at the 5'-end of the capped mRNA.
0071204	name:Name:histone pre-mRNA 3'end processing complex	name:Synonym:histone 3'end pre-mRNA complex	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein that binds to specific sites in, and is required for cleavage of, the 3'-end of histone pre-mRNAs. The complex contains the U7 snRNP and additional proteins, including the stem-loop binding protein (SLBP) and the exonuclease 3'hExo/Eri-1.
0071254	name:Name:cytoplasmic U snRNP body	name:Synonym:U body	name:Synonym:U-body	info:Definition:A ribonucleoprotein complex that can be visualized as a focus in the cytoplasm, and contains uridine-rich small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (U snRNPs) and essential snRNP assembly factors. These U bodies are invariably found in association with P bodies.
0032992	name:Name:protein-carbohydrate complex	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex containing both protein and carbohydrate molecules.
0071666	name:Name:Slit-Robo signaling complex	name:Synonym:Slit-Robo signalling complex	info:Definition:A protein-carbohydrate complex that consists of a transmembrane roundabout (Robo) receptor, an extracellular Slit ligand and heparin/heparan sulfate.
0032993	name:Name:protein-DNA complex	name:Synonym:DNA-protein complex	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex containing both protein and DNA molecules.
0000782	name:Name:telomere cap complex	info:Definition:A complex of DNA and protein located at the end of a linear chromosome that protects and stabilizes a linear chromosome.
0000783	name:Name:nuclear telomere cap complex	info:Definition:A complex of DNA and protein located at the end of a linear chromosome in the nucleus that protects and stabilizes a linear chromosome.
0043769	name:Name:Tpg-containing telomere binding complex	name:Synonym:telomere complex	info:Definition:A complex composed of four polypeptides, a telomere-protecting terminal protein (Tpg), a telomere-associated protein (Tap), DNA polymerase (PolA) and topoisomerase I (TopA), that functions in the replication of the telomeric regions of linear chromosomes, plasmids and circular replicons of some bacterial species.
0000786	name:Name:nucleosome	info:Definition:A complex comprised of DNA wound around a multisubunit core and associated proteins, which forms the primary packing unit of DNA into higher order structures.
0000787	name:Name:cytoplasmic nucleosome	info:Definition:A complex comprised of DNA wound around a multisubunit core and associated proteins, which forms the primary packing unit of DNA in the cytoplasm into higher order structures.
0000788	name:Name:nuclear nucleosome	info:Definition:A complex comprised of DNA wound around a multisubunit core and associated proteins, which forms the primary packing unit of DNA in the nucleus into higher order structures.
0043505	name:Name:centromere-specific nucleosome	name:Synonym:centromere specific nucleosome	name:Synonym:centromeric nucleosome	info:Definition:A form of nucleosome located only at the centromere, in which the histone H3 is replaced by the variant form CENP-A (sometimes known as CenH3).
0005656	name:Name:pre-replicative complex	name:Synonym:pre-RC	info:Definition:A protein-DNA complex assembled at eukaryotic DNA replication origins during late mitosis and G1, allowing the origin to become competent, or 'licensed', for replication. The complex normally includes the origin recognition complex (ORC), Cdc6, Cdt1 and the MiniChromosome Maintenance (Mcm2-7) proteins.
0030894	name:Name:replisome	name:Synonym:DNA synthesome complex	name:Synonym:RC complex	name:Synonym:replication-competent complex	info:Definition:A multi-component enzymatic machine at the replication fork which mediates DNA replication. Includes DNA primase, one or more DNA polymerases, DNA helicases, and other proteins.
0043600	name:Name:cytoplasmic replisome	info:Definition:A multi-component enzymatic machine at the cytoplasmic replication fork, which mediates DNA replication. Includes DNA primase, DNA polymerase, DNA helicase, and other proteins.
0043601	name:Name:nuclear replisome	info:Definition:A multi-component enzymatic machine at the nuclear replication fork, which mediates DNA replication. Includes DNA primase, one or more DNA polymerases, DNA helicases, and other proteins.
0031261	name:Name:DNA replication preinitiation complex	name:Synonym:pre-IC	info:Definition:A protein-DNA complex assembled at eukaryotic DNA replication origins immediately prior to the initiation of DNA replication. The preinitiation complex is formed by the assembly of additional proteins onto an existing prereplicative complex. In budding yeast, the additional proteins include Cdc45p, Sld2p, Sld3p, Dpb11p, DNA polymerases, and others; in fission yeast the GINS complex is present.
0031421	name:Name:invertasome	info:Definition:A complex formed by a recombinase, a regulatory protein, and the DNA sequences bound by each protein; catalyzes a reversible site-specific recombination reaction that results in the alternate expression of one or more genes in various contexts.
0034206	name:Name:enhanceosome	info:Definition:A protein-DNA complex formed by the association of a distinct set of general and specific transcription factors with a region of enhancer DNA. The cooperative assembly of an enhanceosome confers specificity of transcriptional regulation.
0070565	name:Name:telomere-telomerase complex	info:Definition:A complex of DNA and protein located at the end of a linear chromosome that enables replication of the telomeric repeat sequences at the end of a linear chromosome.
0032994	name:Name:protein-lipid complex	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex containing both protein and lipid molecules.
0034358	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle	info:Definition:A spherical particle with a hydrophobic core of triglycerides and/or cholesterol esters, surrounded by an amphipathic monolayer of phospholipids, cholesterol and apolipoproteins. Plasma lipoprotein particles transport lipids, which are non-covalently associated with the particles, in the blood or lymph.
0034362	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein particle	name:Synonym:LDL complex	name:Synonym:LDL particle	name:Synonym:low-density lipoprotein complex	info:Definition:A lipoprotein particle, rich in cholesterol esters and low in triglycerides that is typically composed of APOB100 and APOE and has a density of 1.02-1.06 g/ml and a diameter of between 20-25 nm. LDL particles are formed from VLDL particles (via IDL) by the loss of triglyceride and gain of cholesterol ester. They transport endogenous cholesterol (and to some extent triglycerides) from peripheral tissues back to the liver.
0034364	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle	name:Synonym:HDL complex	name:Synonym:HDL particle	name:Synonym:HDL2	name:Synonym:HDL3	name:Synonym:high-density lipoprotein class complex	info:Definition:A lipoprotein particle with a high density (typically 1.063-1.21 g/ml) and a diameter of 5-10 nm that contains APOAs and may contain APOCs and APOE; found in blood and carries lipids from body tissues to the liver as part of the reverse cholesterol transport process.
0034385	name:Name:triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein particle	info:Definition:A plasma lipoprotein particle that has a hydrophobic core enriched in triglycerides surrounded by an amphipathic monolayer of phospholipids, cholesterol and apolipoproteins. Triglyceride-rich lipoproteinparticles transport lipids, which are non-covalently associated with the particles, in the blood.
0042627	name:Name:chylomicron	info:Definition:A large lipoprotein particle (diameter 75-1200 nm) composed of a central core of triglycerides and cholesterol surrounded by a protein-phospholipid coating. The proteins include one molecule of apolipoprotein B-48 and may include a variety of apolipoproteins, including APOAs, APOCs and APOE. Chylomicrons are found in blood or lymph and carry lipids from the intestines into other body tissues.
0060987	name:Name:lipid tube	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex that contains a tube of lipid surrounded by a protein coat.
0035003	name:Name:subapical complex	name:Synonym:SAC	info:Definition:The most apical region of the lateral plasma membrane of an invertebrate epithelial cell. The subapical complex lies above the zonula adherens and the septate junction, and is comparable to the position of the tight junction of vertebrate cells.
0043234	name:Name:protein complex	name:Synonym:protein-protein complex	info:Definition:Any macromolecular complex composed of two or more polypeptide subunits, which may or may not be identical. Protein complexes may have other associated non-protein prosthetic groups, such as nucleotides, metal ions or other small molecules.
0000015	name:Name:phosphopyruvate hydratase complex	name:Synonym:enolase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric enzyme complex, usually a dimer or an octamer, that catalyzes the conversion of 2-phospho-D-glycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate and water.
0000109	name:Name:nucleotide-excision repair complex	info:Definition:Any complex formed of proteins that act in nucleotide-excision repair.
0000110	name:Name:nucleotide-excision repair factor 1 complex	name:Synonym:NEF1 complex	name:Synonym:XPA-ERCC1-ERCC4 complex	info:Definition:One of several protein complexes involved in nucleotide-excision repair; possesses DNA damage recognition and endodeoxynuclease activities. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rad1p, Rad10p, and Rad14p; in human the subunits are ERCC4/XPF, ERCC1 and XPA, respectively.
0000111	name:Name:nucleotide-excision repair factor 2 complex	name:Synonym:NEF2 complex	info:Definition:One of several protein complexes involved in nucleotide-excision repair; possesses damaged DNA binding activity. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rad4p and Rad23p.
0000112	name:Name:nucleotide-excision repair factor 3 complex	name:Synonym:NEF3 complex	info:Definition:One of several protein complexes involved in nucleotide-excision repair; possesses endodeoxynuclease and DNA helicase activities. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rad2p and the core TFIIH-Ssl2p complex (Core TFIIH is composed of Rad3p, Tfb1p, Tfb2p, Ssl1p, and Tfb4p. Note that Ssl2p is also called Rad25p).
0000113	name:Name:nucleotide-excision repair factor 4 complex	name:Synonym:NEF4 complex	info:Definition:One of several protein complexes involved in nucleotide-excision repair; possesses DNA damage recognition and DNA-dependent ATPase activities. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rad7p and Rad16p.
0070312	name:Name:RAD52-ERCC4-ERCC1 complex	info:Definition:A nucleotide-excision repair complex formed by the association of the heterodimeric endonuclease XPF/ERCC4-ERCC1 (Rad1p and Rad10p in S. cerevisiae) with the RAD52 protein.
0070522	name:Name:ERCC4-ERCC1 complex	name:Synonym:Rad1-Rad10 complex	name:Synonym:XPF-ERCC1 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric nucleotide-excision repair complex that has endonuclease activity specific for bubble structures characteristic of certain DNA lesions. The subunits are known as XPF/ERCC4 and ERCC1 in mammals, and Rad1p and Rad10p in S. cerevisiae.
0070912	name:Name:Ddb1-Ckn1 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric nucleotide-excision repair complex that is involved in transcription-coupled repair. The subunits are known as Ddb1 and Ckn1 in S. pombe; Ddb1 contains a motif called the DDB-box that interacts with adaptor proteins for DDB1/cullin 4 ubiquitin ligases.
0070913	name:Name:Ddb1-Wdr21 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric nucleotide-excision repair complex that is involved in transcription-coupled repair. The subunits are known as Ddb1 and Wdr21 in S. pombe; Ddb1 contains a motif called the DDB-box that interacts with adaptor proteins for DDB1/cullin 4 ubiquitin ligases.
0071942	name:Name:XPC complex	info:Definition:A nucleotide-excision repair complex that is involved in damage sensing during global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER). It is part of the pre-incision (or initial recognition) complex bound to sites of DNA damage. In human, it is composed of XPC, RAD23B and CETN2.
0000123	name:Name:histone acetyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:histone acetylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses histone acetyltransferase activity.
0005671	name:Name:Ada2/Gcn5/Ada3 transcription activator complex	name:Synonym:Ada Two-A containing complex	name:Synonym:ATAC complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that possesses histone acetyltransferase and is involved in regulation of transcription. The budding yeast complex includes Gcn5p, two proteins of the Ada family, and two TBP-associate proteins (TAFs); analogous complexes in other species have analogous compositions, and usually contain homologs of the yeast proteins.
0043189	name:Name:H4/H2A histone acetyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:H4/H2A HAT complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that catalyzes the acetylation of histones H4 and H2A.
0070461	name:Name:SAGA-type complex	name:Synonym:SAGA family complex	info:Definition:A histone acetyltransferase complex that acetylates nucleosomal H3 and H2B and is required for the expression of a subset of Pol II-transcribed genes. The budding yeast complex includes the acetyltransferase Gcn5p, several proteins of the Spt and Ada families, and several TBP-associate proteins (TAFs); analogous complexes in other species have analogous compositions, and usually contain homologs of the yeast proteins.
0070775	name:Name:H3 histone acetyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:H3 HAT complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that catalyzes the acetylation of histone H3.
0072487	name:Name:MSL complex	info:Definition:A histone acetyltransferase complex that catalyzes the acetylation of a histone H4 lysine residue at position 16. In human, it contains the catalytic subunit MOF, and MSL1, MSL2 and MSL3.
0000133	name:Name:polarisome	info:Definition:Protein complex that plays a role in determining cell polarity by directing the localized assembly of actin filaments at polarization sites; in Saccharomyces the polarisome includes Bni1p, Spa2p, Pea2p, and Bud6p.
0031560	name:Name:cellular bud neck polarisome	info:Definition:Protein complex that has a role in determining cell polarity, found at the neck of a fungal bud before and during cytokinesis.
0031561	name:Name:cellular bud tip polarisome	info:Definition:Protein complex that has a role in determining cell polarity, found at the tip of a growing fungal bud.
0031562	name:Name:hyphal tip polarisome	info:Definition:Protein complex that has a role in determining cell polarity, found at the tip of a growing fungal hypha.
0031563	name:Name:mating projection tip polarisome	info:Definition:Protein complex that has a role in determining cell polarity, found at the tip of the mating projection in unicellular fungi exposed to mating pheromone.
0000145	name:Name:exocyst	name:Synonym:Sec6/8 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex peripherally associated with the plasma membrane that determines where vesicles dock and fuse. At least eight complex components are conserved between yeast and mammals.
0000148	name:Name:1,3-beta-D-glucan synthase complex	name:Synonym:1,3-beta-glucan synthase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the transfer of a glucose group from UDP-glucose to a 1,3-beta-D-glucan chain.
0000151	name:Name:ubiquitin ligase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that includes a ubiquitin-protein ligase and other proteins that may confer substrate specificity on the complex.
0000152	name:Name:nuclear ubiquitin ligase complex	info:Definition:A ubiquitin ligase complex found in the nucleus.
0000153	name:Name:cytoplasmic ubiquitin ligase complex	info:Definition:A ubiquitin ligase complex found in the cytoplasm.
0031461	name:Name:cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex	name:Synonym:CRL complex	name:Synonym:cullin complex	name:Synonym:cullin-RING ligase	info:Definition:Any ubiquitin ligase complex in which the catalytic core consists of a member of the cullin family and a RING domain protein; the core is associated with one or more additional proteins that confer substrate specificity.
0033503	name:Name:HULC complex	info:Definition:A ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex that contains two RING finger proteins, which have ubiquitin ligase activity, in addition to a protein with ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme activity; catalyzes the ubiquitination of histone H2B at lysine 119 (or the equivalent residue). In Schizosaccharomyces the subunits are Rhp1, Brl2/Rfp1 and Brl1/Rfp2.
0071797	name:Name:LUBAC complex	info:Definition:A ubiquitin ligase complex that catalyzes linear head-to-tail polyubiquitin conjugation on its targets. In human the complex consists of RBCK1, RNF31 and SHARPIN, and has an MW of approximately 600 kDa, suggesting a heteromultimeric assembly of its subunits. LUBAC stands for Linear Ubiquitin Chain Assembly Complex.
0000178	name:Name:exosome (RNase complex)	name:Synonym:exosome (ribonucleasease complex)	name:Synonym:exosome multienzyme ribonuclease complex	info:Definition:Complex of 3'-5' exoribonucleases.
0000176	name:Name:nuclear exosome (RNase complex)	name:Synonym:eukaryotic exosome multienzyme ribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:nuclear exosome (ribonuclease complex)	name:Synonym:nuclear exosome multienzyme ribonuclease complex	info:Definition:Complex of 3'-5' exoribonucleases found in the nucleus.
0000177	name:Name:cytoplasmic exosome (RNase complex)	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic exosome (ribonuclease complex)	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic exosome multienzyme ribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:prokaryotic exosome multienzyme ribonuclease complex	info:Definition:Complex of 3'-5' exoribonucleases found in the cytoplasm.
0000214	name:Name:tRNA-intron endonuclease complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the endonucleolytic cleavage of pre-tRNA, producing 5'-hydroxyl and 2',3'-cyclic phosphate termini, and specifically removing the intron.
0000307	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase holoenzyme complex	name:Synonym:CDK holoenzyme	info:Definition:Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) are heterodimeric enzymes that contain a kinase catalytic subunit associated with a regulatory cyclin partner.
0000308	name:Name:cytoplasmic cyclin-dependent protein kinase holoenzyme complex	name:Synonym:CDK holoenzyme	info:Definition:Cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK) complex found in the cytoplasm.
0016533	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 holoenzyme complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that activates cyclin-dependent kinase 5; composed of regulatory and catalytic subunits.
0019908	name:Name:nuclear cyclin-dependent protein kinase holoenzyme complex	name:Synonym:CDK holoenzyme	info:Definition:Cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK) complex found in the nucleus.
0031387	name:Name:MPF complex	info:Definition:A complex consisting of a Cdc2-class (also known as Cdc28) cyclin-dependent kinase and an M-phase cyclin such as S. pombe Cdc13. The MPF complex phosphorylates and activates the anaphase promoting complex (APC).
0097121	name:Name:cyclin A1-CDK1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin A1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097122	name:Name:cyclin A2-CDK1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin A2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097123	name:Name:cyclin A1-CDK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin A1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097124	name:Name:cyclin A2-CDK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin A2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097125	name:Name:cyclin B1-CDK1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin B1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097126	name:Name:cyclin B2-CDK1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin B2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097127	name:Name:cyclin B3-CDK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin B3 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097128	name:Name:cyclin D1-CDK4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097129	name:Name:cyclin D2-CDK4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097130	name:Name:cyclin D3-CDK4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D3 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097131	name:Name:cyclin D1-CDK6 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097132	name:Name:cyclin D2-CDK6 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097133	name:Name:cyclin D3-CDK6 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin D3 and cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097134	name:Name:cyclin E1-CDK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin E1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0097135	name:Name:cyclin E2-CDK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of cyclin E2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Cyclins are characterized by periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle. Cyclin-dependent kinases represent a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that become active upon binding to a cyclin regulatory partner.
0000346	name:Name:transcription export complex	name:Synonym:TREX complex	info:Definition:The transcription export (TREX) complex couples transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II to mRNA export. The complex associates with the polymerase and travels with it along the length of the transcribed gene. TREX is composed of the THO transcription elongation complex as well as other proteins that couple THO to mRNA export proteins. The TREX complex is known to be found in a wide range of eukaryotes, including S. cerevisiae and metazoans.
0000347	name:Name:THO complex	info:Definition:The THO complex is a nuclear complex that is required for transcription elongation through genes containing tandemly repeated DNA sequences. The THO complex is also part of the TREX (TRanscription EXport) complex that is involved in coupling transcription to export of mRNAs to the cytoplasm. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of four subunits: Hpr1p, Tho2p, Thp1p, and Mft1p, while the human complex is composed of 7 subunits.
0000445	name:Name:THO complex part of transcription export complex	name:Synonym:THO complex part of TREX complex	info:Definition:The THO complex when it is part of the TREX (TRanscription EXport) complex that is involved in coupling transcription to export of mRNAs to the cytoplasm. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of four subunits: Hpr1, Tho2, Thp1, and Mft1, while the human complex is composed of 7 subunits.
0000446	name:Name:nucleoplasmic THO complex	info:Definition:The THO complex when it is acting as a nuclear complex that is required for transcription elongation through genes containing tandemly repeated DNA sequences. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of four subunits: Hpr1, Tho2, Thp1, and Mft1, while the human complex is composed of 7 subunits.
0000408	name:Name:EKC/KEOPS complex	name:Synonym:Endopeptidase-like Kinase Chromatin-associated protein complex	name:Synonym:Kinase, putative Endopeptidase and Other Proteins of Small size protein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex proposed to be involved in transcription as well as promoting telomere uncapping and telomere elongation. For example, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae the complex contains Bud32p, Kae1p, Gon7p, Cgi121p, and Pcc1p.
0000441	name:Name:SSL2-core TFIIH complex	info:Definition:A complex which is part of both the general transcription factor TFIIH and the nucleotide-excision repair factor 3 complex. It is composed of the tightly associated 5 subunit core TFIIH subcomplex plus one additional, more loosely associated subunit. The subunits are well conserved from yeast to humans. In S. cerevisiae, the 5-subunit core is composed of Rad3, Tfb1, Tfb2, Ssl1, Tfb4 and the loosely associated subunit is Ssl2p (also called Rad25). In humans, the 5 subunit core is composed of ERCC2, p62, p55, p44, p34 and the loosely associated subunit is XPB.
0000442	name:Name:SSL2-core TFIIH complex portion of NEF3 complex	info:Definition:The SSL2-core TFIIH complex when it is part of the nucleotide-excision repair factor 3 (NEF3). It is composed of the tightly associated 5 subunit core TFIIH subcomplex plus one additional, less tighly associated subunit. The subunits are well conserved from yeast to humans. In S. cerevisiae, the 5-subunit core is composed of Rad3, Tfb1, Tfb2, Ssl1, Tfb4 and the loosely associated subunit is Ssl2p (also called Rad25). In humans, the 5 subunit core is composed of ERCC2, p62, p55, p44, p34 and the loosely associated subunit is XPB.
0000443	name:Name:SSL2-core TFIIH complex portion of holo TFIIH complex	info:Definition:The SSL2-core TFIIH complex when it is part of the general transcription factor TFIIH. It is composed of the tightly associated five subunit core TFIIH subcomplex plus one additional, less tighly associated subunit. The subunits are well conserved from yeast to humans. In S. cerevisiae, the 5-subunit core is composed of Rad3, Tfb1, Tfb2, Ssl1, Tfb4 and the loosely associated subunit is Ssl2p (also called Rad25). In humans, the 5 subunit core is composed of ERCC2, p62, p55, p44, p34 and the loosely associated subunit is XPB.
0000444	name:Name:MIS12/MIND type complex	name:Synonym:Mis12 complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein kinetochore subcomplex that binds to centromeric chromatin and forms part of the inner kinetochore. It helps to recruit outer kinetochore subunits that will bind to microtubules. In humans, it consists of MIS12, DSN1, NSL1 and PMF1.
0000818	name:Name:nuclear MIS12/MIND type complex	name:Synonym:MIND complex	name:Synonym:Mtw1p Including Nnf1p-Nsl1p-Dsn1p complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein kinetochore subcomplex that binds to centromeric chromatin and forms part of the inner kinetochore of a chromosome in the nucleus. It helps to recruit outer kinetochore subunits that will bind to microtubules. Nuclear localization arises in some organisms because the nuclear envelope is not broken down during mitosis. In S. cerevisiae, it consists of at least four proteins: Mtw1p, Nnf1p, Nsl1p, and Dsn1.
0000502	name:Name:proteasome complex	name:Synonym:26S proteasome	info:Definition:A large multisubunit complex which catalyzes protein degradation. This complex consists of the barrel shaped proteasome core complex and one or two associated proteins or complexes that act in regulating entry into or exit from the core.
0031595	name:Name:nuclear proteasome complex	info:Definition:A proteasome found in the nucleus of a cell.
0031596	name:Name:ER proteasome complex	info:Definition:A proteasome found in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031597	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome complex	info:Definition:A proteasome complex found in the cytosol of a cell.
0000506	name:Name:glycosylphosphatidylinositol-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT) complex	name:Synonym:GPI-GlcNAc transferase complex	name:Synonym:GPI-GnT complex	name:Synonym:GPI-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the transfer of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to an acceptor phosphatidylinositol, the first step in the production of GPI anchors for cell surface proteins. The complex contains PIG-A, PIG-C, PIG-H, PIG-Q, PIG-P, and DPM2 in human, and Eri1p, Gpi1p, Gpi2p, Gpi15p, Gpi19p, and Spt14p in budding yeast.
0000776	name:Name:kinetochore	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that is located at the centromeric region of DNA and provides an attachment point for the spindle microtubules.
0000777	name:Name:condensed chromosome kinetochore	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that is located at the centromeric region of a condensed chromosome and provides an attachment point for the spindle microtubules.
0000796	name:Name:condensin complex	name:Synonym:13S condensin complex	name:Synonym:SMC complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex that plays a central role in chromosome condensation.
0000799	name:Name:nuclear condensin complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex that plays a central role in the condensation of chromosomes that remain in the nucleus.
0000797	name:Name:condensin core heterodimer	name:Synonym:8S condensin complex	name:Synonym:Smc2-Smc4 complex	info:Definition:The core heterodimer of a condensin complex, a multisubunit protein complex that plays a central role in chromosome condensation.
0000808	name:Name:origin recognition complex	name:Synonym:ORC	name:Synonym:origin of replication recognition complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that is located at the replication origins of a chromosome.
0000809	name:Name:cytoplasmic origin of replication recognition complex	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic ORC	name:Synonym:prokaryotic ORC	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that is located at the replication origins of a chromosome in the cytoplasm.
0005664	name:Name:nuclear origin of replication recognition complex	name:Synonym:eukaryotic ORC	name:Synonym:nuclear ORC	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that is located at the replication origins of a chromosome in the nucleus.
0000811	name:Name:GINS complex	name:Synonym:Go, Ichi, Ni and San complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric protein complex that associates with replication origins, where it is required for the initiation of DNA replication, and with replication forks.
0000813	name:Name:ESCRT I complex	name:Synonym:Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport	info:Definition:An endosomal sorting complex required for transport. It consists of the class E vacuolar protein sorting (Vps) proteins and interacts with ubiquitinated cargoes.
0000814	name:Name:ESCRT II complex	name:Synonym:Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport	info:Definition:An endosomal sorting complex required for transport and functions downstream of ESCRT I complex. It consists of the class E vacuolar protein sorting (Vps) proteins and is required for the membrane recruitment of ESCRT III complex and binds to ubiquitinated cargoes.
0000815	name:Name:ESCRT III complex	name:Synonym:Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport	info:Definition:An endosomal sorting complex required for transport. Consists of two soluble subcomplexes of highly charged coiled-coil proteins and is required for sorting and/or concentration of multivesicular body (MVB) cargoes.
0000817	name:Name:COMA complex	name:Synonym:Ctf19p-Okp1p-Mcm1p-Ame1p complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex in yeast consisting of Ctf19p, Okp1p, Mcm21p, and Ame1p. This complex bridges the subunits that are in contact with centromeric DNA and the subunits bound to microtubules during kinetochore assembly.
0000930	name:Name:gamma-tubulin complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex composed of gamma-tubulin and other non-tubulin proteins. Gamma-tubulin complexes are localized to microtubule organizing centers, and play an important role in the nucleation of microtubules. The number and complexity of non-tubulin proteins associated with these complexes varies between species.
0000931	name:Name:gamma-tubulin large complex	info:Definition:A complex of gamma tubulin and associated proteins thought to be formed by multimerization of gamma-tubulin small complexes. An example of this structure is found in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
0008275	name:Name:gamma-tubulin small complex	name:Synonym:gammaTuSC	info:Definition:A complex usually comprising two gamma-tubulin molecules and two conserved non-tubulin proteins. Some gamma-tubulin small complexes are thought to be the repeating unit making up the core of the gamma-tubulin ring complex.
0000938	name:Name:GARP complex	name:Synonym:Golgi associated retrograde protein complex	name:Synonym:VFT tethering complex	name:Synonym:Vps fifty three tethering complex	info:Definition:A quatrefoil tethering complex required for retrograde traffic from the early endosome back to the late Golgi and biogenesis of cytoplasmic vesicles.
0000939	name:Name:condensed chromosome inner kinetochore	name:Synonym:inner centromere core complex	name:Synonym:inner kinetochore of condensed chromosome	name:Synonym:inner kinetochore plate	info:Definition:The region of a condensed chromosome kinetochore closest to centromeric DNA; in mammals the CREST antigens (CENP proteins) are found in this layer; this layer may help define underlying centromeric chromatin structure and position of the kinetochore on the chromosome.
0000941	name:Name:condensed nuclear chromosome inner kinetochore	name:Synonym:inner kinetochore of condensed nuclear chromosome	info:Definition:The region of a condensed nuclear chromosome kinetochore closest to centromeric DNA; this layer may help define underlying centromeric chromatin structure and position of the kinetochore on the chromosome.
0000940	name:Name:condensed chromosome outer kinetochore	name:Synonym:outer kinetochore of condensed chromosome	name:Synonym:outer kinetochore plate	info:Definition:The region of a condensed chromosome kinetochore most external to centromeric DNA; this outer region mediates kinetochore-microtubule interactions.
0000942	name:Name:condensed nuclear chromosome outer kinetochore	name:Synonym:outer kinetochore of condensed nuclear chromosome	info:Definition:The region of a condensed nuclear chromosome kinetochore most external to centromeric DNA; this outer region mediates kinetochore-microtubule interactions.
0000974	name:Name:Prp19 complex	name:Synonym:nineteen complex	name:Synonym:NTC	name:Synonym:Prp19/CDC5 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of Prp19 and associated proteins that is involved in the transition from the precatalytic spliceosome to the activated form that catalyzes step 1 of splicing, and which remains associated with the spliceosome through the second catalytic step. It is widely conserved, found in both yeast and mammals, though the exact composition varies. In S. cerevisiae, it contains Prp19p, Ntc20p, Snt309p, Isy1p, Syf2p, Cwc2p, Prp46p, Clf1p, Cef1p, and Syf1p.
0001401	name:Name:mitochondrial sorting and assembly machinery complex	name:Synonym:SAM complex	name:Synonym:TOB complex	info:Definition:A large complex of the mitochondrial outer membrane that mediates sorting of some imported proteins to the outer membrane and their assembly in the membrane; functions after import of incoming proteins by the mitochondrial outer membrane translocase complex.
0001405	name:Name:presequence translocase-associated import motor	name:Synonym:mitochondrial import motor	name:Synonym:PAM complex	name:Synonym:pre-sequence translocase-associated import motor	info:Definition:Protein complex located on the matrix side of the mitochondrial inner membrane and associated with the presequence translocase complex; hydrolyzes ATP to provide the force to drive import of proteins into the mitochondrial matrix.
0001534	name:Name:radial spoke	info:Definition:Protein complex that links the outer microtubule doublet of the ciliary or flagellum axoneme with the sheath that surrounds the central pair of microtubules. Composed of a stalk that attaches to each doublet microtubule and a globular structure (spoke head) that projects toward the central pair of microtubules.
0001535	name:Name:radial spokehead	info:Definition:Protein complex forming part of eukaryotic flagellar apparatus.
0001536	name:Name:radial spoke stalk	info:Definition:Globular portion of the radial spoke that projects towards the central pair of microtubules.
0002095	name:Name:caveolar macromolecular signaling complex	name:Synonym:caveolar macromolecular signalling complex	info:Definition:A complex composed of proteins required for beta adrenergic receptor activation of protein kinase A. It includes the Cav 12. subunit of L-type calcium channel, protein kinase A regulatory subunit 2(PKAR2), adenyl cyclase, beta-adrenergic receptor, G-alpha-S, protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and caveolin 3 (CAV3).
0002096	name:Name:polkadots	info:Definition:A punctate, filamentous structure composed of Bcl10 that appears in the cytoplasm of T-cells shortly after T-cell receptor stimulation. Polkadots stands for Punctate Oligomeric Killing and Activating DOmains Transducing Signals.
0002102	name:Name:podosome	info:Definition:An actin-rich adhesion structure characterized by formation upon cell substrate contact and localization at the substrate-attached part of the cell, contain an F-actin-rich core surrounded by a ring structure containing proteins such as vinculin and talin, and have a diameter of 0.5 mm.
0002111	name:Name:BRCA2-BRAF35 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric complex of BRCA2 and BRAF35 (BRCA2-associated factor 35). The BRCA2-BRAF35 complex is often associated with condensed chromatin during mitosis.
0002133	name:Name:polycystin complex	info:Definition:A stable heterodimeric complex composed of polycystin-1 and polycystin-2.
0002142	name:Name:stereocilia ankle link complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins that connect growing stereocilia in developing cochlear hair cells, composed of Vlgr1, usherin, vezatin, and whirlin.
0002144	name:Name:cytosolic tRNA wobble base thiouridylase complex	name:Synonym:Cut1-Cut2 complex	name:Synonym:tRNA thiouridylase	info:Definition:A complex of two proteins involved in the thiolation of U34 in glutamate, lysine, and glutamine tRNAs of eukaryotes.
0002167	name:Name:VRK3/VHR/ERK complex	info:Definition:A ternary complex consisting of VRK3, VHR (Dusp3), and ERK1 (Mapk3) existing in neuronal cells, and is involved in regulation of the ERK signaling pathway.
0002169	name:Name:3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase complex, mitochondrial	info:Definition:A heterodimeric complex having 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase activity. The alpha subunit has a covalently bound biotin essential for the ATP-dependent carboxylation. The beta subunit possess carboxyltransferase activity which presumably is essential for binding to 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA.
0002178	name:Name:palmitoyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex with palmitoyltransferase activity.
0002179	name:Name:homodimeric serine palmitoyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A homodimeric complex which transfers a palmitoyl group onto serine, forming 3-dehydro-D-sphinganine.
0031211	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum palmitoyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A dimeric complex of the endoplasmic reticulum that catalyzes S-palmitoylation, the addition of palmitate (C16:0) or other long-chain fatty acids to proteins at a cysteine residue.
0002180	name:Name:5-lipoxygenase complex	info:Definition:An nuclear membrane protein complex having arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase activity.
0002185	name:Name:creatine kinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex having creatine kinase activity.
0002186	name:Name:cytosolic creatine kinase complex	info:Definition:A dimeric protein complex having creatine kinase activity.
0002187	name:Name:mitochondrial creatine kinase complex	info:Definition:An octomeric protein complex having creatine kinase activity.
0002189	name:Name:ribose phosphate diphosphokinase complex	name:Synonym:ribose phosphate diphosphokinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex having ribose phosphate diphosphokinase activity.
0005577	name:Name:fibrinogen complex	name:Synonym:fibrinogen	name:Synonym:fibrinogen alpha chain	name:Synonym:fibrinogen beta chain	name:Synonym:fibrinogen gamma chain	info:Definition:A highly soluble, elongated protein complex found in blood plasma and involved in clot formation. It is converted into fibrin monomer by the action of thrombin. In the mouse, fibrinogen is a hexamer, 46 nm long and 9 nm maximal diameter, containing two sets of nonidentical chains (alpha, beta, and gamma) linked together by disulfide bonds.
0005601	name:Name:classical-complement-pathway C3/C5 convertase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that catalyzes the cleavage of complement components C3 and C5, and acts in the classical pathway of complement activation; consists of one monomer of C2a and one monomer of C4b; C2a is the catalytic subunit, but cannot catalyze cleavage alone.
0005602	name:Name:complement component C1 complex	name:Synonym:complement component C1q complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of six subunits of C1q, each formed of the three homologous polypeptide chains C1QA, C1QB, and C1QB, and tetramer of two C1QR and two C1QS polypeptide chains.
0005616	name:Name:larval serum protein complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex which, in Drosophila, is a heterohexamer of three subunits, alpha, beta and gamma. The complex is thought to store amino acids for synthesis of adult proteins.
0005658	name:Name:alpha DNA polymerase:primase complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase alpha:primase complex	name:Synonym:heterotetrameric polymerase alpha holoenzyme	name:Synonym:pol-prim	name:Synonym:primosome	info:Definition:A complex of four polypeptides, comprising large and small DNA polymerase alpha subunits and two primase subunits, which catalyzes the synthesis of an RNA primer on the lagging strand of replicating DNA; the smaller of the two primase subunits alone can catalyze oligoribonucleotide synthesis.
0005662	name:Name:DNA replication factor A complex	name:Synonym:replication protein A	name:Synonym:RPA	name:Synonym:single-stranded DNA-binding protein complex	name:Synonym:SSB	info:Definition:A conserved heterotrimeric complex that binds nonspecifically to single-stranded DNA and is required for multiple processes in eukaryotic DNA metabolism, including DNA replication, DNA repair, and recombination. In all eukaryotic organisms examined the complex is composed of subunits of approximately 70, 30, and 14 kDa.
0005663	name:Name:DNA replication factor C complex	name:Synonym:activator 1 complex	name:Synonym:RFC complex	info:Definition:A complex of five polypeptides in eukaryotes, and two in prokaryotes, that loads the DNA polymerase processivity factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA, thereby permitting processive DNA synthesis catalyzed by DNA polymerase.
0043598	name:Name:cytoplasmic DNA replication factor C complex	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic complex of two polypeptides that loads the DNA polymerase processivity factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA, thereby permitting processive DNA synthesis catalyzed by DNA polymerase. Examples of this component are found in prokaryotic species.
0043599	name:Name:nuclear DNA replication factor C complex	info:Definition:A nuclear complex of five polypeptides that loads the DNA polymerase processivity factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA, thereby permitting processive DNA synthesis catalyzed by DNA polymerase delta or epsilon. In Saccharomyces and several other species, the subunits are known as Rfc1p-Rfc5p, although subunit names do not necessarily correspond between different species.
0005667	name:Name:transcription factor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex, distinct from RNA polymerase, that associates with DNA at promoters or at cis-acting regulatory sequences, by direct binding or by interaction with other DNA-binding polypeptides or complexes, and regulates transcription.
0000120	name:Name:RNA polymerase I transcription factor complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that acts at promoters of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase I.
0000126	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIIB complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is involved in regulating transcription from RNA polymerase III (Pol III) promoters. TFIIIB contains the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and two Pol III-specific proteins, B'' and BRF.
0000127	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIIC complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is involved in regulating transcription from RNA polymerase III (Pol III) promoters. TFIIIC contains three conserved subunits that associate with the proximal Pol III promoter element, and additional subunits that associate with sequence elements downstream of the promoter and are more diverged among species.
0005669	name:Name:transcription factor TFIID complex	info:Definition:A complex composed of TATA binding protein (TBP) and TBP associated factors (TAFs); the total mass is typically about 800 kDa. Most of the TAFs are conserved across species. In TATA-containing promoters for RNA polymerase II (Pol II), TFIID is believed to recognize at least two distinct elements, the TATA element and a downstream promoter element. TFIID is also involved in recognition of TATA-less Pol II promoters. Binding of TFIID to DNA is necessary but not sufficient for transcription initiation from most RNA polymerase II promoters.
0005672	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIA complex	info:Definition:A component of the transcription machinery of RNA Polymerase II. In humans, TFIIA is a heterotrimer composed of an alpha (P35), beta (P19) and gamma subunits (P12).
0005673	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIE complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor which in humans consists of a complex of two alpha and two beta chains. Recruits TFIIH to the initiation complex and helps activate both RNA polymerase II and TFIIH.
0005674	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIF complex	info:Definition:A general transcription initiation factor which in humans consists of a heterodimer of an alpha and a beta subunit. Helps recruit RNA polymerase II to the initiation complex and promotes translation elongation.
0005675	name:Name:holo TFIIH complex	info:Definition:A complex that contains kinase activity directed towards the C-terminal Domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II and is essential for initiation at RNA polymerase II promoters in vitro. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of the 5-subunit core (Rad3p, Tfb1p, Tfb2p, Ssl1p and Tfb4p), Ssl2p, and TFIIK (Kin28p, Ccl1p, and Tfb3p). All of the subunits have equivalents in humans: the 5 subunit core is composed of ERCC2, p62, p55, p44, p34; the equivalent of the TFIIK subcomplex is composed of MO15, Mat1, and a cyclin; the human equivalent of Ssl2p is XPB.
0008230	name:Name:ecdysone receptor holocomplex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric complex containing the products of the insect genes Ecdysone receptor (EcR) and ultraspiracle (usp). Binding of ecdysone promotes association between the two subunits, and the receptor complex then initiates molting and metamorphosis by binding DNA and regulating the transcription of target genes.
0016513	name:Name:core-binding factor complex	name:Synonym:AML1 complex	name:Synonym:CBF complex	name:Synonym:PEPB2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric transcription factor complex that contains an alpha subunit (Runx1, Runx2 or Runx3 in human) that binds DNA and a non-DNA-binding beta subunit (CBFbeta), and binds to a consensus sequence 5'-YGYGGTY-3' found in several enhancers and promoters; the beta subunit enhances the DNA binding of the alpha subunit.
0016602	name:Name:CCAAT-binding factor complex	info:Definition:A heteromeric transcription factor complex that binds to the CCAAT-box upstream of promoters; in Saccharomyces it activates the transcription of genes in response to growth in a nonfermentable carbon source; consists of four known subunits: HAP2, HAP3, HAP4 and HAP5.
0019185	name:Name:snRNA-activating protein complex	name:Synonym:SNAPc	info:Definition:A protein complex that recognizes the proximal sequence element of RNA polymerase II and III snRNA promoters.
0030014	name:Name:CCR4-NOT complex	info:Definition:A large multimeric transcription factor complex that can regulate transcription positively or negatively; consists of a core complex plus additional proteins; may interact with other proteins to control initiation of transcription. In Saccharomyces the core complex comprises Ccr4p, Caf1p, Not1p, Not2p, Not3p, Not4p, and Not5p; Caf4p, Caf16p, and several less well characterized proteins.
0030232	name:Name:insulin control element activator complex	name:Synonym:ICE activator complex	info:Definition:Transcription factor complex that binds to the insulin control element (ICE), a DNA sequence element found within the 5'-flanking region of the insulin gene, and activates ICE-mediated transcription.
0030907	name:Name:MBF transcription complex	name:Synonym:DSC1 transcription factor complex	name:Synonym:MBF	name:Synonym:Mlu1-box binding factor	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds to the Mlu1 cell cycle box (MCB) promoter element, consensus sequence ACGCGN, and is involved in regulation of transcription during the G1/S transition of the cell cycle. In Saccharomyces, the complex contains a heterodimer of the DNA binding protein Mbp1p and the activator Swi4p, and is associated with additional proteins known as Nrm1p, Msa1p, and Msa2p; in Schizosaccharomyces the complex contains Res1p, Res2p, and Cdc10p.
0032444	name:Name:activin responsive factor complex	name:Synonym:ARF complex	info:Definition:A transcriptionally active complex that binds to an activin response element (ARE) in the promoter of target genes, and is composed of two SMAD2 proteins, one SMAD4 protein and a Forkhead activin signal transducer (FAST) transcription factor.
0033276	name:Name:transcription factor TFTC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that does not contain either a TATA-binding protein (TBP) or a TBP-like factor, but is composed of several TAFIIs and other proteins, including a histone acetyltransferase. This complex is able to nucleate transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II, can mediate transcriptional activation, and has histone acetyltransferase activity.
0033309	name:Name:SBF transcription complex	name:Synonym:SBF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds to the Swi4/6 cell cycle box (SCB) promoter element, consensus sequence CRCGAAA, and activates transcription during the G1/S transition of the cell cycle. In Saccharomyces, the complex contains a heterodimer of the DNA binding protein Swi6p and the activator Swi4p, and is associated with additional proteins known as Whi5p and Msa1p.
0034734	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIIC1 complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that forms part of the TFIIIC complex, observed in human. The complex is poorly characterized, but contains the 250-kDa form of HsBdp1, and is thought to include nuclear factor 1 (NF1). It stimulates binding by human TFIIIC2 and is required for transcription activity.
0034735	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIIC2 complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that forms part of the TFIIIC complex, observed in human; composed of five subunits (GTF3C1/hTFIIIC220/TFIIICalpha, GTF3C2/hTFIIIC110/TFIIICbeta, GTF3C3/hTFIIIC102/TFIIICgamma, GTF3C4/hTFIIIC90/TFIIICdelta and GTF3C5/hTFIIIC63/TFIIICepsilon in human) that together recognize the type 2 RNA polymerase III promoter.
0034740	name:Name:TFIIIC-TOP1-SUB1 complex	name:Synonym:TFIIIC-Topoisomerase 1-PC4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains TFIIIC, topoisomerase 1, and Sub1/PC4. Characterized in human, the complex is involved in regulating transcription from RNA polymerase III (Pol III) promoters. Topoisomerase 1 and Sub1 enhance the accuracy of transcription termination, and promote reinitiation by Pol III.
0035189	name:Name:Rb-E2F complex	name:Synonym:retinoblastoma-E2F complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex containing a heterodimeric E2F transcription factor and a Retinoblastoma (Rb) family member. This complex is capable of repressing transcription of E2F-regulated genes in order to regulate cell cycle progression.
0070264	name:Name:transcription factor TFIIIE complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is involved in regulating transcription from RNA polymerase III (Pol III) promoters. TFIIIE contains a specific subset of ribosomal proteins.
0070514	name:Name:SRF-myogenin-E12 complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that contains the serum response factor (SRF) and the basic helix-loop-helix proteins myogenin and E12, and is involved in activating transcription of muscle-specific genes.
0070721	name:Name:ISGF3 complex	name:Synonym:interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 transcription complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that consists of a Stat1-Stat2 heterodimer and the IRF9 protein.
0070985	name:Name:TFIIK complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that forms part of the holo TFIIH complex. In Saccharomyces, TFIIK contains Ccl1p, Tfb3p and Kin2p.
0071148	name:Name:TEAD-1-YAP complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is composed of the DNA biding protein TEAD-1 and the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
0071149	name:Name:TEAD-2-YAP complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is composed of the DNA biding protein TEAD-2 and the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
0071150	name:Name:TEAD-3-YAP complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is composed of the DNA biding protein TEAD-3 and the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
0071151	name:Name:TEAD-4-YAP complex	info:Definition:A transcription factor complex that is composed of the DNA biding protein TEAD-4 and the transcriptional coactivator YAP.
0071943	name:Name:Myc-Max complex	info:Definition:A transcriptional factor complex that consists of a heterodimer of the bHLH-ZIP proteins Myc and Max.
0005678	name:Name:chromatin assembly complex	name:Synonym:nucleosome assembly complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that acts in the formation of nucleosomes or higher order chromatin structure.
0000417	name:Name:HIR complex	name:Synonym:HIRA complex	info:Definition:A protein complex proposed to be involved in replication-independent nucleosome assembly, by promoting histone deposition onto DNA. For example, in Saccharomyces, the complex contains Hir1p, Hir2p, Hir3p, and Hpc2p.
0016590	name:Name:ACF complex	name:Synonym:ATP-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling factor complex	info:Definition:A chromatin-remodeling complex that catalyzes the ATP-dependent assembly of periodic nucleosome arrays. In Drosophila, the complex comprises ACF1 and ISWI.
0033186	name:Name:CAF-1 complex	name:Synonym:chromatin assembly factor 1 complex	info:Definition:A conserved heterotrimeric protein complex that promotes histone H3 and H4 deposition onto newly synthesized DNA during replication or DNA repair; specifically facilitates replication-dependent nucleosome assembly with the major histone H3 (H3.1). In many species the CAF-1 subunits are designated p150, p60, and p48.
0005731	name:Name:nucleolus organizer region	name:Synonym:NOR	name:Synonym:nucleolus organiser region	name:Synonym:nucleolus organizer complex	info:Definition:A region of a chromosome where nucleoli form during interphase, and where genes encoding the largest rRNA precursor transcript are tandemly arrayed.
0005742	name:Name:mitochondrial outer membrane translocase complex	name:Synonym:GIP complex	name:Synonym:TOM complex	info:Definition:A large complex of the mitochondrial outer membrane that mediates transport of proteins into all mitochondrial compartments.
0005744	name:Name:mitochondrial inner membrane presequence translocase complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial inner membrane pre-sequence translocase complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial inner membrane translocase complex	name:Synonym:Tim23 complex	info:Definition:The protein transport machinery of the mitochondrial inner membrane that contains three essential Tim proteins: Tim17 and Tim23 are thought to build a preprotein translocation channel while Tim44 interacts transiently with the matrix heat-shock protein Hsp70 to form an ATP-driven import motor.
0005745	name:Name:m-AAA complex	info:Definition:Protease complex of the mitochondrial inner membrane that is involved in mitochondrial protein turnover and in processing of proteins imported into mitochondria.
0005787	name:Name:signal peptidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is located in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and cleaves the signal sequence from precursor proteins following their transport out of the cytoplasmic space.
0005831	name:Name:steroid hormone aporeceptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex consisting of a steroid receptor associated with nonreceptor proteins, minimally a dimer of Hsp90 and a monomer of hsp56/FKBP59; forms in the absence of bound ligand.
0005832	name:Name:chaperonin-containing T-complex	name:Synonym:CCT particle	name:Synonym:TriC	info:Definition:A multisubunit ring-shaped complex that mediates protein folding in the cytosol without a cofactor.
0005833	name:Name:hemoglobin complex	name:Synonym:haemoglobin complex	info:Definition:An iron-containing, oxygen carrying complex. In vertebrates it is made up of two pairs of associated globin polypeptide chains, each chain carrying a noncovalently bound heme prosthetic group.
0005834	name:Name:heterotrimeric G-protein complex	name:Synonym:heterotrimeric G-protein GTPase activity	name:Synonym:heterotrimeric G-protein GTPase, alpha-subunit	name:Synonym:heterotrimeric G-protein GTPase, beta-subunit	name:Synonym:heterotrimeric G-protein GTPase, gamma-subunit	info:Definition:Any of a family of heterotrimeric GTP-binding and hydrolyzing proteins; they belong to a superfamily of GTPases that includes monomeric proteins such as EF-Tu and RAS. Heterotrimeric G-proteins consist of three subunits; the alpha subunit contains the guanine nucleotide binding site and possesses GTPase activity; the beta and gamma subunits are tightly associated and function as a beta-gamma heterodimer; extrinsic plasma membrane proteins (cytoplasmic face) that function as a complex to transduce signals from G-protein coupled receptors to an effector protein.
0005835	name:Name:fatty acid synthase complex	name:Synonym:cytosolic FAS complex	name:Synonym:cytosolic fatty acid synthase complex	name:Synonym:cytosolic type I FAS complex	name:Synonym:cytosolic type I fatty acid synthase complex	name:Synonym:FAS complex	name:Synonym:fatty acid synthetase complex	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase complex	info:Definition:A multienzyme complex that catalyses the synthesis of fatty acids from acetyl CoA.
0005836	name:Name:fatty-acyl-CoA synthase complex	name:Synonym:fatty acyl CoA synthase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses fatty-acyl-CoA synthase activity.
0005838	name:Name:proteasome regulatory particle	name:Synonym:19S regulatory particle	name:Synonym:modulator complex	name:Synonym:PA700 proteasome activator	name:Synonym:PA700-dependent proteasome activator	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex, which caps one or both ends of the proteasome core complex. This complex recognizes and unfolds ubiquitinated proteins, and translocates them to the proteasome core complex.
0031598	name:Name:nuclear proteasome regulatory particle	info:Definition:The regulatory subcomplex of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031599	name:Name:ER proteasome regulatory particle	info:Definition:The regulatory subcomplex of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031600	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome regulatory particle	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex located in the cytosol of a cell, which caps one or both ends of the proteasome core complex. This complex recognizes, unfolds ubiquitinated proteins and translocates them to the proteasome core complex.
0005839	name:Name:proteasome core complex	name:Synonym:20S core complex	name:Synonym:20S proteasome	name:Synonym:macropain	name:Synonym:PA28gamma-20S proteasome	info:Definition:A multisubunit barrel shaped endoprotease complex, which is the core of the proteasome complex.
0031601	name:Name:nuclear proteasome core complex	info:Definition:The core complex of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031602	name:Name:ER proteasome core complex	info:Definition:The core complex of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031603	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome core complex	info:Definition:The core complex of a proteasome located in the cytosol of a cell.
0005849	name:Name:mRNA cleavage factor complex	info:Definition:Any macromolecular complex involved in cleavage or polyadenylation of mRNA molecules.
0005847	name:Name:mRNA cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor complex	name:Synonym:CFII complex	name:Synonym:cleavage and polyadenylylation specificity factor activity	name:Synonym:CPF complex	name:Synonym:CPSF complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that binds to the canonical AAUAAA hexamer and to U-rich upstream sequence elements on the pre-mRNA, thereby stimulating the otherwise weakly active and nonspecific polymerase to elongate efficiently RNAs containing a poly(A) signal.
0005848	name:Name:mRNA cleavage stimulating factor complex	name:Synonym:cleavage stimulation factor activity	name:Synonym:CstF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for mRNA cleavage but not for poly(A) addition.
0005850	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 complex	name:Synonym:eIF-2	name:Synonym:eIF2	info:Definition:Complex of three heterogeneous polypeptide chains, that form a ternary complex with initiator methionyl-tRNA and GTP. This ternary complex binds to free 40S subunit, which subsequently binds the 5' end of mRNA.
0005851	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B complex	name:Synonym:eIF-2B	name:Synonym:eif2B	info:Definition:A multisubunit guanine nucleotide exchange factor which catalyzes the exchange of GDP bound to initiation factor eIF2 for GTP, generating active eIF2-GTP. In humans, it is composed of five subunits, alpha, beta, delta, gamma and epsilon.
0005852	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex	name:Synonym:eIF-3	name:Synonym:eIF3	info:Definition:A complex of several polypeptides that plays at least two important roles in protein synthesis: First, eIF3 binds to the 40S ribosome and facilitates loading of the Met-tRNA/eIF2.GTP ternary complex to form the 43S preinitiation complex. Subsequently, eIF3 apparently assists eIF4 in recruiting mRNAs to the 43S complex. The eIF3 complex contains five conserved core subunits, and may contain several additional proteins; the non-core subunits are thought to mediate association of the complex with specific sets of mRNAs.
0071540	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex, eIF3e	name:Synonym:eIF3e-containing eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex	info:Definition:An eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex that contains the PCI-domain protein eIF3e.
0071541	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex, eIF3m	name:Synonym:eIF3m-containing eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex	info:Definition:An eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 complex that contains the PCI-domain protein eIF3m.
0005853	name:Name:eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit nucleotide exchange complex that binds GTP and aminoacyl-tRNAs, and catalyzes their codon-dependent placement at the A-site of the ribosome. In humans, the complex is composed of four subunits, alpha, beta, delta and gamma.
0005854	name:Name:nascent polypeptide-associated complex	name:Synonym:NAC	name:Synonym:NACA	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that can reversibly bind to ribosomes, and is located in direct proximity to newly synthesized polypeptide chains as they emerge from the ribosome.
0005861	name:Name:troponin complex	info:Definition:A complex of accessory proteins (typically troponin T, troponin I and troponin C) found associated with actin in muscle thin filaments; involved in calcium regulation of muscle contraction.
0005874	name:Name:microtubule	name:Synonym:microtubuli	name:Synonym:microtubulus	info:Definition:Any of the long, generally straight, hollow tubes of internal diameter 12-15 nm and external diameter 24 nm found in a wide variety of eukaryotic cells; each consists (usually) of 13 protofilaments of polymeric tubulin, staggered in such a manner that the tubulin monomers are arranged in a helical pattern on the microtubular surface, and with the alpha/beta axes of the tubulin subunits parallel to the long axis of the tubule; exist in equilibrium with pool of tubulin monomers and can be rapidly assembled or disassembled in response to physiological stimuli; concerned with force generation, e.g. in the spindle.
0005876	name:Name:spindle microtubule	info:Definition:Any microtubule that is part of a mitotic or meiotic spindle; anchored at one spindle pole.
0005879	name:Name:axonemal microtubule	info:Definition:A microtubule in the axoneme of a cilium or flagellum; an axoneme contains nine modified doublet microtubules surrounding a pair of single microtubules.
0005880	name:Name:nuclear microtubule	info:Definition:Any microtubule in the nucleus of a cell.
0005881	name:Name:cytoplasmic microtubule	name:Synonym:non-spindle-associated astral microtubule	info:Definition:Any microtubule in the cytoplasm of a cell.
0020025	name:Name:subpellicular microtubule	info:Definition:Singlet microtubules that lie underneath the inner membrane complex and emanate from the basal ring of the conoid.
0033289	name:Name:intraconoid microtubule	info:Definition:A microtubule located such that it threads through the conoid and projects through the polar ring.
0005875	name:Name:microtubule associated complex	info:Definition:Any multimeric complex connected to a microtubule.
0005869	name:Name:dynactin complex	info:Definition:A 20S multiprotein assembly of total mass about 1.2 MDa that activates dynein-based activity in vivo. A large structural component of the complex is an actin-like 40 nm filament composed of actin-related protein, to which other components attach.
0005871	name:Name:kinesin complex	info:Definition:Any complex that includes a dimer of molecules from the kinesin superfamily, a group of related proteins that contain an extended region of predicted alpha-helical coiled coil in the main chain that likely produces dimerization. The native complexes of several kinesin family members have also been shown to contain additional peptides, often designated light chains as all of the noncatalytic subunits that are currently known are smaller than the chain that contains the motor unit. Kinesin complexes generally possess a force-generating enzymatic activity, or motor, which converts the free energy of the gamma phosphate bond of ATP into mechanical work.
0008352	name:Name:katanin complex	info:Definition:A complex possessing an activity that couples ATP hydrolysis to the severing of microtubules; usually a heterodimer comprising a catalytic subunit (often 60kDa) and a regulatory subunit (often 80 kDa).
0030286	name:Name:dynein complex	info:Definition:Any of several large complexes that contain two or three dynein heavy chains and several light chains, and have microtubule motor activity.
0031500	name:Name:Tea1 cell-end complex	info:Definition:A high molecular weight complex characterized in S. pombe containing the cell-end anchoring protein Tea1. This complex is transported to the cell ends by microtubules and is involved in bipolar growth and the maintennce of normal cell polarity.
0032133	name:Name:chromosome passenger complex	name:Synonym:chromosomal passenger complex	name:Synonym:CPC	name:Synonym:CPC complex	info:Definition:A eukaryotically conserved protein complex that localizes to kinetochores in early mitosis, the spindle mid-zone in anaphase B and to the telophase midbody. It has been proposed that the passenger complex coordinates various events based on its location to different structures during the course of mitosis. Complex members include the BIR-domain-containing protein Survivin, Aurora B kinase, INCENP and Borealin.
0070652	name:Name:HAUS complex	name:Synonym:HAUS augmin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that localizes to interphase centrosomes and to mitotic spindle tubules and regulates mitotic spindle assembly and centrosome integrity; in human, the complex consists of eight subunits, some of which are homologous to subunits of the Drosophila Augmin complex.
0005882	name:Name:intermediate filament	name:Synonym:intermediate filament associated protein	name:Synonym:type I intermediate filament associated protein	name:Synonym:type II intermediate filament associated protein	info:Definition:A cytoskeletal structure that forms a distinct elongated structure, characteristically 10 nm in diameter, that occurs in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Intermediate filaments form a fibrous system, composed of chemically heterogeneous subunits and involved in mechanically integrating the various components of the cytoplasmic space. Intermediate filaments may be divided into five chemically distinct classes: Type I, acidic keratins; Type II, basic keratins; Type III, including desmin, vimentin and others; Type IV, neurofilaments and related filaments; and Type V, lamins.
0005638	name:Name:lamin filament	name:Synonym:type V intermediate filament	info:Definition:Any of a group of intermediate-filament proteins that form the fibrous matrix on the inner surface of the nuclear envelope. They are classified as lamins A, B and C.
0005883	name:Name:neurofilament	name:Synonym:type IV intermediate filament	info:Definition:A type of intermediate filament found in the core of neuronal axons. Neurofilaments are heteropolymers composed of three type IV polypeptides: NF-L, NF-M, and NF-H (for low, middle, and high molecular weight). Neurofilaments are responsible for the radial growth of an axon and determine axonal diameter.
0045095	name:Name:keratin filament	name:Synonym:acidic keratin	name:Synonym:basic/neutral keratin	info:Definition:A filament composed of acidic and basic keratins (types I and II), typically expressed in epithelial cells. The keratins are the most diverse classes of IF proteins, with a large number of keratin isoforms being expressed. Each type of epithelium always expresses a characteristic combination of type I and type II keratins.
0045098	name:Name:type III intermediate filament	name:Synonym:desmin	name:Synonym:glial fibrillary acidic protein	name:Synonym:peripherin	name:Synonym:type III intermediate filament associated protein	name:Synonym:vimentin	info:Definition:A type of intermediate filament, typically made up of one or more of the proteins vimentin, desmin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and peripherin. Unlike the keratins, the type III proteins can form both homo- and heteropolymeric IF filaments.
0005884	name:Name:actin filament	name:Synonym:microfilament	info:Definition:A filamentous structure formed of a two-stranded helical polymer of the protein actin and associated proteins. Actin filaments are a major component of the contractile apparatus of skeletal muscle and the microfilaments of the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells. The filaments, comprising polymerized globular actin molecules, appear as flexible structures with a diameter of 5-9 nm. They are organized into a variety of linear bundles, two-dimensional networks, and three dimensional gels. In the cytoskeleton they are most highly concentrated in the cortex of the cell just beneath the plasma membrane.
0042643	name:Name:actomyosin, actin part	info:Definition:The actin part of any complex of actin, myosin, and accessory proteins.
0005885	name:Name:Arp2/3 protein complex	info:Definition:A stable protein complex that contains two actin-related proteins, Arp2 and Arp3, and five novel proteins (ARPC1-5), and functions in the nucleation of branched actin filaments.
0005889	name:Name:hydrogen:potassium-exchanging ATPase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen/potassium-exchanging ATPase complex	name:Synonym:proton pump	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses hydrogen:potassium-exchanging ATPase activity; characterized in animal cells, where it maintains ionic gradients of Na+ and K+ at the expense of ATP hydrolysis; The complex contains two obligatory subunits, the catalytic alpha subunit and a glycosylated beta subunit; two additional subunits, gamma and channel-inducing factor (CHIF), may also be present.
0005890	name:Name:sodium:potassium-exchanging ATPase complex	name:Synonym:sodium pump	name:Synonym:sodium/potassium-exchanging ATPase complex	info:Definition:Sodium:potassium-exchanging ATPases are tetrameric proteins, consisting of two large alpha subunits and two smaller beta subunits. The alpha subunits bear the active site and penetrate the membrane, while the beta subunits carry oligosaccharide groups and face the cell exterior.
0005922	name:Name:connexon complex	info:Definition:An assembly of six molecules of connexin, made in the Golgi apparatus and subsequently transported to the plasma membrane, where docking of two connexons on apposed plasma membranes across the extracellular space forms a gap junction.
0005931	name:Name:nexin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex found in the axoneme of eukaryotic cilia and flagella. It forms interconnections between the microtubule outer doublets that surround the inner central pair of microtubules.
0005942	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide 3-kinase complex	name:Synonym:PI3-kinase p85-subunit alpha- PI3-kinase p110 complex	name:Synonym:PI3K complex	name:Synonym:PIK3C3-PIK3R4 complex	name:Synonym:PIK3CA-PIK3R1 complex	info:Definition:A complex containing a heterodimer of a catalytic subunit and a regulatory (adaptor) subunit of any phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K).
0005943	name:Name:1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 3-kinase, class IA complex	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate kinase, class IA complex	name:Synonym:class IA PI3K complex	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide 3-kinase complex, class IA	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that possesses 1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 3-kinase activity; comprises a catalytic Class IA phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) subunit of 110-120 kDa and an associated SH2 domain-containing regulatory subunit that is a member of a family of related proteins often called p85 proteins. Class I PI3Ks phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol [PI], phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate [PI(4)P] and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2], and are divided into subclasses A and B according to the type of adaptor subunit with which they associate. Through the interaction with the SH2-containing adaptor subunits, Class IA PI3K catalytic subunits are linked to tyrosine kinase signaling pathways.
0005944	name:Name:1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 3-kinase, class IB complex	name:Synonym:1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate kinase, class IB complex	name:Synonym:class IB PI3K complex	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide 3-kinase complex, class IB	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that possesses 1-phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 3-kinase activity; comprises a catalytic Class IB phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) subunit of 110-120 kDa and an associated regulatory subunit that is larger than, and unrelated to, the p85 proteins present in class IA complexes. Class I PI3Ks phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol [PI], phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate [PI(4)P] and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2] and are divided into subclasses A and B according to the type of adaptor subunit with which they associate. Class IB PI3Ks are stimulated by G-proteins and do not interact with the SH2-domain containing adaptors that bind to Class IA PI3Ks.
0034271	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I	name:Synonym:PtdIns-3-kinase complex I	info:Definition:A protein complex that posseses phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity and is involved in autophagy. In budding yeast, this complex consists of Vps30p, Vps34p, Atg14p and Vps15p.
0034272	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex II	name:Synonym:PtdIns-3-kinase complex II	info:Definition:A protein complex that posseses phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity and is involved in vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) via endosomes. In budding yeast, this complex consists of Vps30p, Vps34p, VPS38 and Vps15p.
0035032	name:Name:phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex, class III	name:Synonym:class III PI3K complex	name:Synonym:phosphoinositide 3-kinase complex, class III	info:Definition:A complex containing a heterodimer of a catalytic Class III phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) subunit bound to a regulatory (adaptor) subunit. Class III PI3Ks have a substrate specificity restricted to phosphatidylinositol (PI).
0005945	name:Name:6-phosphofructokinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses 6-phosphofructokinase activity; homodimeric, homooctameric, and allosteric homotetrameric forms are known.
0005946	name:Name:alpha,alpha-trehalose-phosphate synthase complex (UDP-forming)	name:Synonym:trehalose-6-phosphate synthase complex	name:Synonym:trehalose-6-phosphate synthase/phosphatase	name:Synonym:UDP-glucose-glucosephosphate glucosyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses alpha,alpha-trehalose-phosphate synthase (UDP-forming) and trehalose-phosphatase activities, and thus catalyzes two reactions in trehalose biosynthesis. In the complex identified in Saccharomyces, Tps1p has alpha,alpha-trehalose-phosphate synthase (UDP-forming) activity, Tps2p has trehalose 6-phosphate phosphatase activity; Tps3p is a regulatory subunit, and an additional subunit, Tsl1p, may be present.
0005948	name:Name:acetolactate synthase complex	name:Synonym:acetohydroxyacid synthase complex	info:Definition:A dimeric (a large and a small chain) or tetrameric (two large and two small chains) enzyme complex. Catalyzes the formation of acetolactate from pyruvate.
0005950	name:Name:anthranilate synthase complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric enzyme complex made up of two components I and two components II. Catalyzes the formation of anthranilate, pyruvate and L-glutamate from chorismate and L-glutamine.
0005951	name:Name:carbamoyl-phosphate synthase complex	name:Synonym:arginine-specific carbamoyl phosphate synthetase complex	name:Synonym:carbamoyl phosphate synthase complex	name:Synonym:carbamoyl-phosphate synthase arginine-specific complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the formation of carbamoyl phosphate; comprises a small subunit that binds and cleaves glutamine, and a large subunit that accepts the ammonia group cleaved from glutamine, binds all of the remaining substrates and effectors, and carries out all of the other catalytic events.
0005952	name:Name:cAMP-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:3',5' cAMP-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:3',5'-cAMP-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:PKA	info:Definition:An enzyme complex, composed of regulatory and catalytic subunits, that catalyzes protein phosphorylation. Inactive forms of the enzyme have two regulatory chains and two catalytic chains; activation by cAMP produces two active catalytic monomers and a regulatory dimer.
0005953	name:Name:CAAX-protein geranylgeranyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme, composed of an alpha and a beta subunit. Participates in the post-translational C-terminal modification of several small GTPases, allowing their targeting to the membrane.
0005954	name:Name:calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:CAMK2	name:Synonym:CaMKII	info:Definition:An enzyme complex which in eukaryotes is composed of four different chains: alpha, beta, gamma, and delta. The different isoforms assemble into homo- or heteromultimeric holoenzymes composed of 8 to 12 subunits. Catalyzes the phosphorylation of proteins to O-phosphoproteins.
0005956	name:Name:protein kinase CK2 complex	name:Synonym:casein kinase II complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses protein serine/threonine kinase activity, and contains two catalytic alpha subunits and two regulatory beta subunits. Protein kinase CK2 complexes are found in nearly every subcellular compartment, and can phosphorylate many protein substrates in addition to casein.
0005960	name:Name:glycine cleavage complex	name:Synonym:glycine cleavage system	name:Synonym:glycine decarboxylase complex	name:Synonym:glycine dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) complex	name:Synonym:glycine dehydrogenase complex (decarboxylating)	name:Synonym:glycine synthase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the reversible oxidation of glycine. In E. coli, it has four components: dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, glycine dehydrogenase (decarboxylating), lipoyl-GcvH-protein and aminomethyltransferase, also known as L, P, H, and T.
0005964	name:Name:phosphorylase kinase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the phosphorylation of phosphorylase b to form phosphorylase a.
0005965	name:Name:protein farnesyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses protein farnesyltransferase activity.
0005966	name:Name:cyclic-nucleotide phosphodiesterase complex	name:Synonym:photoreceptor cyclic-nucleotide phosphodiesterase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the hydrolysis of bonds in a cyclic nucleotide.
0005968	name:Name:Rab-protein geranylgeranyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:GGTase-II complex	name:Synonym:Rab geranylgeranyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:RAB-protein geranylgeranyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:RabGGTase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme complex, which in mammals is composed of an alpha and a beta subunit, and which associates with an accessory protein Rep (Rab escort protein). Catalyzes of the transfer of a geranyl-geranyl group from geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate to a Rab protein.
0005969	name:Name:serine-pyruvate aminotransferase complex	name:Synonym:serine-pyruvate aminotransferase, type 1 complex	name:Synonym:serine-pyruvate aminotransferase, type 2B complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation of hydroxypyruvate and alanine from serine and pyruvate.
0005971	name:Name:ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex composed of 2-4 or more subunits, which usually contains nonheme iron and requires ATP for catalysis. Catalyzes the formation of 2'-deoxyribonucleoside diphosphate and thioredoxin disulfide from ribonucleoside diphosphate and thioredoxin.
0008023	name:Name:transcription elongation factor complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that interacts with RNA polymerase II to increase (positive transcription elongation factor) or reduce (negative transcription elongation factor) the rate of transcription elongation.
0008024	name:Name:positive transcription elongation factor complex b	name:Synonym:P-TEFb	info:Definition:A transcription elongation factor complex that facilitates the transition from abortive to productive elongation by phosphorylating the CTD domain of the large subunit of DNA-directed RNA polymerase II, holoenzyme. Contains cyclin T and a cyclin-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit.
0016593	name:Name:Cdc73/Paf1 complex	name:Synonym:Paf1 complex	name:Synonym:Paf1p complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that associates with RNA polymerase II and general RNA polymerase II transcription factor complexes and may be involved in both transcriptional initiation and elongation. In Saccharomyces the complex contains Paf1p, Cdc73p, Ctr9p, Rtf1p, and Leo1p.
0032021	name:Name:NELF complex	name:Synonym:negative elongation factor complex	info:Definition:A complex of five proteins, designated NELF-A, -B, -C, -D, and -E in human, that can physically associate with RNP polymerase II to induce transcriptional pausing.
0032044	name:Name:DSIF complex	name:Synonym:5,6-Dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole sensitivity inducing factor complex	name:Synonym:DRB sensitivity inducing factor complex	name:Synonym:Spt4-Spt5 complex	name:Synonym:Spt5-Spt4 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex formed of Spt4 and Spt5 proteins which is expressed in eukaryotes from yeast to man. DSIF is an inhibitory elongation factor that promotes RNA polymerase II transcriptional pausing, but can also stimulate transcriptional elongation under certain conditions, and may play a role in RNA processing via its physical association with mRNA capping enzymes.
0032783	name:Name:ELL-EAF complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that acts as an RNA polymerase II elongation factor; the complex is conserved from yeast to humans, and is present in S. pombe, but absent from S. cerevisiae.
0035101	name:Name:FACT complex	name:Synonym:Facilitates chromatin transcription complex	info:Definition:An abundant nuclear complex, which was originally identified in mammalian systems as a factor required for transcription elongation on chromatin templates. The FACT complex has been shown to destablilize the interaction between the H2A/H2B dimer and the H3/H4 tetramer of the nucleosome, thus reorganizing the structure of the nucleosome. In this way, the FACT complex may play a role in DNA replication and other processes that traverse the chromatin, as well as in transcription elongation. FACT is composed of two proteins that are evolutionarily conserved in all eukaryotes and homologous to mammalian Spt16 and SSRP1. In metazoans, the SSRP1 homolog contains an HMG domain; however in fungi and protists, it does not. For example, in S. cerevisiae the Pob3 protein is homologous to SSRP1, but lacks the HMG chromatin binding domain. Instead, the yFACT complex of Spt16p and Pob3p, binds to nucleosomes where multiple copies of the HMG-domain containing protein Nhp6p have already bound, but Nhp6p does not form a stable complex with the Spt16p/Pob3p heterodimer.
0070449	name:Name:elongin complex	name:Synonym:elongin (SIII) complex	name:Synonym:transcription elongation factor SIII complex	info:Definition:A transcription elongation factor complex that suppresses RNA polymerase II pausing, and may act by promoting proper alignment of the 3'-end of nascent transcripts with the polymerase catalytic site. Consists of a transcriptionally active Elongin A subunit (abut 100 kDa)and two smaller Elongin B (about 18 kDa) and Elongin C (about 15 kDa)subunits.
0008074	name:Name:guanylate cyclase complex, soluble	info:Definition:Complex that possesses guanylate cyclase activity and is not bound to a membrane.
0008180	name:Name:signalosome	name:Synonym:COP9 complex	name:Synonym:CSN	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the deneddylation of proteins, including the cullin component of SCF ubiquitin E3 ligase; deneddylation increases the activity of cullin family ubiquitin ligases. The signalosome is involved in many regulatory process, including some which control development, in many species; also regulates photomorphogenesis in plants; in many species its subunits are highly similar to those of the proteasome.
0008247	name:Name:1-alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine esterase complex	name:Synonym:2-acetyl-1-alkylglycerophosphocholine esterase complex	name:Synonym:platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex composed of two catalytic alpha subunits, which form a catalytic dimer, and a non-catalytic, regulatory beta subunit; the catalytic dimer may be an alpha1/alpha1 or alpha2/alpha2 homodimer, or an alpha1/alpha2 heterodimer. Modulates the action of platelet-activating factor (PAF).
0008250	name:Name:oligosaccharyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:oligosaccharyl transferase complex	name:Synonym:OST complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is found in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane of eukaryotes and transfers lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor to asparagine residues on nascent proteins. In yeast, the complex includes at least nine different subunits, whereas in mammalian cells at least three different forms of the complex have been detected.
0034998	name:Name:oligosaccharyltransferase I complex	name:Synonym:OSTCI	info:Definition:An oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex that contains at least seven polypeptides and is the major OST complex in mammalian cells. Of the three forms of mammalian OST complex identified, the OSTI complex has the weakest affinity for ribosomes.
0034999	name:Name:oligosaccharyltransferase II complex	name:Synonym:OSTCII	info:Definition:An oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex that contains the seven polypeptides found in OST complex I, plus heterotrimeric Sec61alpha-beta-gamma. Of the three forms of mammalian OST complexes identified, the OSTII complex has intermediate affinity for ribosomes.
0035000	name:Name:oligosaccharyltransferase III complex	name:Synonym:OSTCIII	info:Definition:An oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex that contains the seven polypeptides found in OST complex I, plus heterotrimeric Sec61alpha-beta-gamma and the tetrameric TRAP complex. Of the three forms of mammalian OST complexes identified, the OSTIII complex has the strongest affinity for ribosomes.
0008278	name:Name:cohesin complex	name:Synonym:14S cohesin	name:Synonym:SMC complex	name:Synonym:SMC/kleisin ring complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is required for sister chromatid cohesion in eukaryotes. The cohesin complex forms a molecular ring complex, and is composed of structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) and kleisin proteins. For example, in yeast, the complex is composed of the SMC proteins Smc1p and Smc3p, and the kleisin protein Scc1p. In vertebrates, the complex is composed of the SMC1 (SMC1A or SMC1B) and SMC3 heterodimer attached via their hinge domains to a kleisin (RAD21, REC8 or RAD21L) which links them, and one STAG protein (STAG1, STAG2 or STAG3).
0000798	name:Name:nuclear cohesin complex	info:Definition:A cohesin complex required for cohesion between sister chromatids that remain in the nucleus.
0030892	name:Name:mitotic cohesin complex	info:Definition:A cohesin complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion during mitosis; has a subunit composition distinct from that of the meiotic cohesin complex.
0030893	name:Name:meiotic cohesin complex	info:Definition:A cohesin complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion during meiosis; has a subunit composition distinct from that of the mitotic cohesin complex.
0008280	name:Name:cohesin core heterodimer	name:Synonym:9S cohesin	name:Synonym:Smc1-Smc3 complex	info:Definition:The core heterodimer of a cohesin complex; a structure required for sister chromatid cohesion in eukaryotes.
0008287	name:Name:protein serine/threonine phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A complex, normally consisting of a catalytic and a regulatory subunit, which catalyzes the removal of a phosphate group from a serine or threonine residue of a protein.
0000159	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 2A complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that has protein serine/threonine phosphatase activity that is polycation-stimulated (PCS), being directly stimulated by protamine, polylysine, or histone H1; it constitutes a subclass of several enzymes activated by different histones and polylysine, and consists of catalytic, scaffolding, and regulatory subunits. The catalytic and scaffolding subunits form the core enzyme, and the holoenzyme also includes the regulatory subunit.
0000164	name:Name:protein phosphatase type 1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses magnesium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase (AMD phosphatase) activity, and consists of a catalytic subunit and one or more regulatory subunits that dictates the phosphatase's substrate specificity, function, and activity.
0005955	name:Name:calcineurin complex	name:Synonym:calcium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase complex	name:Synonym:protein phosphatase type 2B complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric calcium ion and calmodulin dependent protein phosphatase composed of catalytic and regulatory subunits; the regulatory subunit is very similar in sequence to calmodulin.
0005963	name:Name:magnesium-dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the removal of serine- or threonine-bound phosphate groups from a wide range of phosphoproteins, including a number of enzymes that have been phosphorylated under the action of a kinase.
0017023	name:Name:myosin phosphatase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the removal of the phosphate group from phosphomyosin.
0030289	name:Name:protein phosphatase 4 complex	info:Definition:The complex formed by the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 4 plus a regulatory subunit.
0071595	name:Name:Nem1-Spo7 phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A protein serine/threonine phosphatase complex that is involved in nuclear envelope organization, and contains proteins known in budding yeast as Nem1p and Spo7p.
0072357	name:Name:PTW/PP1 phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A protein serine/threonine phosphatase complex that contains a catalytic subunits (PPP1CA, PPP1CB or PPP1CC) and the regulatory subunits PPP1R10 (PNUTS), TOX4 and WDR82, and plays a role in the control of chromatin structure and cell cycle progression during the transition from mitosis into interphase.
0008290	name:Name:F-actin capping protein complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer consisting of alpha and beta subunits that binds to and caps the barbed ends of actin filaments, thereby regulating the polymerization of actin monomers but not severing actin filaments.
0005870	name:Name:actin capping protein of dynactin complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer consisting of alpha and beta subunits that binds to and caps the barbed ends of actin filaments, nucleates the polymerization of actin monomers but does not sever actin filaments, and which is a part of the dynactin complex.
0008303	name:Name:caspase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is located in the cytosol and acts as a cysteine-type endopeptidase are involved in apoptosis; the peptidase activity has specificity for the hydrolysis of aspartyl bonds.
0008385	name:Name:IkappaB kinase complex	name:Synonym:IKK complex	info:Definition:A protein serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates IkappaB, thereby targeting this for proteasomal degradation and allowing the nuclear translocation of kB. Composed of alpha, beta and gamma subunits, the latter not having kinase activity but presumed to play a regulatory role.
0008537	name:Name:proteasome activator complex	name:Synonym:PA28	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that activates the hydrolysis of small nonubiquitinated peptides by binding to the proteasome core complex.
0008540	name:Name:proteasome regulatory particle, base subcomplex	info:Definition:The subcomplex of the proteasome regulatory particle that directly associates with the proteasome core complex.
0031610	name:Name:nuclear proteasome regulatory particle, base subcomplex	info:Definition:The subunits of the regulatory particle that directly associate with the core complex of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031611	name:Name:ER proteasome regulatory particle, base subcomplex	info:Definition:The subunits of the regulatory particle that directly associate with the core complex of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031612	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome regulatory particle, base subcomplex	info:Definition:The subcomplex of the proteasome regulatory particle that directly associates with the proteasome core complex located in the cytosol of the cell.
0008541	name:Name:proteasome regulatory particle, lid subcomplex	info:Definition:The subcomplex of the proteasome regulatory particle that forms the peripheral lid, which is added on top of the base subcomplex.
0031613	name:Name:nuclear proteasome regulatory particle, lid subcomplex	info:Definition:The subunits that form the peripheral lid of the regulatory particle of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031614	name:Name:ER proteasome regulatory particle, lid subcomplex	info:Definition:The subunits that form the peripheral lid of the regulatory particle of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031615	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome regulatory particle, lid subcomplex	info:Definition:The subcomplex of the cytosolic proteasome regulatory particle that forms the peripheral lid, which is added on top of the base subcomplex.
0009316	name:Name:3-isopropylmalate dehydratase complex	name:Synonym:isopropylmalate isomerase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme complex composed of subunits leuC and leuD. Catalyzes the isomerization between 2-isopropylmalate and 3-isopropylmalate, via the formation of 2-isopropylmaleate.
0009317	name:Name:acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:ACCase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the first step in long-chain fatty acid biosynthesis. For example, in E. coli the complex is heterohexameric and composed of biotin carbonyl carrier protein, biotin carboxylase and the acetate CoA-transferase complex.
0032282	name:Name:plastid acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:plastid ACCase complex	info:Definition:An acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex located in the stroma of a plastid.
0009318	name:Name:exodeoxyribonuclease VII complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes exonucleolytic cleavage in either 5' to 3' or 3' to 5' direction to yield nucleoside 5'-phosphates; it prefers single-stranded DNA.
0009319	name:Name:cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase activity; consists of four polypeptide subunits and associated prosthetic groups.
0009320	name:Name:phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase activity.
0009321	name:Name:alkyl hydroperoxide reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex, usually a homodimer, which directly reduces cellular levels of organic hydroperoxides.
0009322	name:Name:trimethylamine-N-oxide reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the reduction of trimethylamine N-oxide to trimethylamine.
0009324	name:Name:D-amino-acid dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses D-amino-acid dehydrogenase activity.
0009325	name:Name:nitrate reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation of nitrate from nitrite with the concomitant reduction of an acceptor.
0009326	name:Name:formate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the dehydrogenation of formate to produce carbon dioxide (CO2).
0009327	name:Name:NAD(P)+ transhydrogenase complex (AB-specific)	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses NAD(P)+ transhydrogenase (AB-specific) activity. Homodimeric, trimeric, and heterotetrameric complexes have been identified.
0009328	name:Name:phenylalanine-tRNA ligase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the ligation of phenylalanine to tRNA(Phe), forming L-phenylalanyl-tRNA(Phe).
0009329	name:Name:acetate CoA-transferase complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric enzyme complex made up of two alpha subunits and two beta subunits. Part of the acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex. Catalyzes the transfer of a carboxyl group to form malonyl-CoA.
0032283	name:Name:plastid acetate CoA-transferase complex	info:Definition:An acetate CoA-transferase complex located in the stroma of a plastid.
0009330	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase complex (ATP-hydrolyzing)	info:Definition:Complex that possesses DNA topoisomerase (ATP-hydrolyzing) activity.
0009331	name:Name:glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the dehydrogenation of sn-glycerol 3-phosphate to form glycerone phosphate.
0009332	name:Name:glutamate-tRNA ligase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the ligation of glutamate and tRNA(Glu) to form glutamyl-tRNA(Glu).
0009333	name:Name:cysteine synthase complex	info:Definition:Cysteine synthase is a multienzyme complex made up, in E. coli, of the heteromeric hexamer serine acetyltransferase and the homodimer O-acetylserine (thiol)-lyase A.
0009334	name:Name:3-phenylpropionate dioxygenase complex	info:Definition:Enzyme complex consisting of four proteins: the two subunits of the hydroxylase component (hcaE and hcaF), a ferredoxin (hcaC) and a ferredoxin reductase (hcaD). Converts 3-phenylpropionic acid (PP) into cis-3-(3-carboxyethyl)-3,5-cyclohexadiene-1,2-diol (PP-dihydrodiol).
0009336	name:Name:sulfate adenylyltransferase complex (ATP)	name:Synonym:sulphate adenylyltransferase complex (ATP)	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation adenylylsulfate from sulfate and ATP.
0009337	name:Name:sulfite reductase complex (NADPH)	name:Synonym:sulphite reductase complex (NADPH)	info:Definition:A multisubunit iron flavoprotein, which in yeast is composed of 2 alpha and 2 beta subunits. Catalyzes the reduction of sulfite to sulfide.
0009338	name:Name:exodeoxyribonuclease V complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes exonucleolytic cleavage (in the presence of ATP) in either 5' to 3' or 3' to 5' direction to yield 5'-phosphooligonucleotides. Exodeoxyribonuclease V shows a preference for double-stranded DNA and possesses DNA-dependent ATPase activity. It acts endonucleolytically on single-stranded circular DNA.
0009339	name:Name:glycolate oxidase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the oxidation of 2-hydroxy acid to form 2-oxo acid and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The enzyme is a flavoprotein (FMN).
0009340	name:Name:DNA topoisomerase IV complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme, which in most bacterial species is composed of two subunits, ParC and ParE. Functions in chromosome segregation and can relax supercoiled DNA.
0009341	name:Name:beta-galactosidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses beta-galactosidase activity, i.e. catalyzes the hydrolysis of terminal non-reducing beta-D-galactose residues in beta-D-galactosides. In E. coli, the complex is a homotetramer; dimeric and hexameric beta-galactosidase complexes have been observed in other species.
0009343	name:Name:biotin carboxylase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation of carboxybiotin-carboxyl-carrier protein from biotin-carboxyl-carrier protein and carbon dioxide (CO2).
0032284	name:Name:plastid biotin carboxylase complex	info:Definition:A biotin carboxylase complex located in the stroma of a plastid.
0009344	name:Name:nitrite reductase complex [NAD(P)H]	info:Definition:Complex that possesses nitrite reductase [NAD(P)H] activity.
0009345	name:Name:glycine-tRNA ligase complex	name:Synonym:glycine-tRNA synthetase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric enzyme complex which, in bacteria, is usually a tetramer of two alpha and two beta chains and in eukaryotes, is usually a homodimer. Functions in the ligation of glycine and tRNA(Gly) to form glycyl-tRNA(Gly).
0009346	name:Name:citrate lyase complex	info:Definition:Citrate lyase is a multienzyme complex with three constituents: the alpha subunit, citrate-ACP transferase; the beta subunit, citryl-ACP lyase; and the gamma subunit, an acyl-carrier protein which also carries the prosthetic group components. All three subunits are required for citrate lyase enzyme activity.
0009347	name:Name:aspartate carbamoyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A multienzyme complex that catalyzes the formation N-carbamoyl-L-aspartate from carbamoyl phosphate and L-aspartate. It exhibits a variety of architectural organizations, but in all microorganisms the core catalytic component is a homotrimer of approximately 34 kDa polypeptides.
0009348	name:Name:ornithine carbamoyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A homotrimeric protein complex that catalyzes the transfer of a carbamoyl group to ornithine, forming citrulline.
0009349	name:Name:riboflavin synthase complex	info:Definition:An flavoprotein that catalyzes the reaction the breakdown of dimethyl(ribityl)lumazine to form riboflavin and ribitylamino-amino-dihydroxypyrimidine.
0009350	name:Name:ethanolamine ammonia-lyase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the breakdown of ethanolamine to form acetaldehyde and ammonia.
0009356	name:Name:aminodeoxychorismate synthase complex	name:Synonym:4-amino-4-deoxychorismate synthase complex	name:Synonym:ADC synthase complex	name:Synonym:p-aminobenzoate synthetase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that possesses 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate synthase activity.
0009357	name:Name:protein-N(PI)-phosphohistidine-sugar phosphotransferase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate from protein N(PI)-phosphohistidine to a sugar molecule. It is enzyme II of the phosphotransferase system.
0009358	name:Name:polyphosphate kinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses polyphosphate kinase activity.
0009359	name:Name:Type II site-specific deoxyribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:Type II restriction enzyme complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that functions as an endonuclease to cleave DNA at or near a specific recognition site, when that site is unmethylated. These complexes may be dimers or tetramers; it is also possible for the endonuclease to be in a complex with the corresponding methyltransferase that methylates the recognition site. DNA restriction systems such as this are used by bacteria to defend against phage and other foreign DNA that may enter a cell.
0009365	name:Name:protein histidine kinase complex	info:Definition:A complex that possesses protein histidine kinase activity.
0009366	name:Name:enterobactin synthetase complex	name:Synonym:enterochelin synthetase complex	info:Definition:A multienzyme complex usually composed of four proteins, EntB, EntD, EntE and EntF. Plays a role in the enterobactin biosynthesis pathway.
0009368	name:Name:endopeptidase Clp complex	info:Definition:A protein complex comprised of members of the ClpX, ClpC, ClpD, ClpP or ClpR protein families. ClpPs are the proteolytic subunit of active complexes, and ClpA and ClpX form the regulatory subunits. Enzymatically active and inactive complexes can form.
0009840	name:Name:chloroplastic endopeptidase Clp complex	info:Definition:A Clp endopeptidase complex located in the chloroplast.
0009841	name:Name:mitochondrial endopeptidase Clp complex	info:Definition:A Clp endopeptidase complex located in the mitochondrion.
0009375	name:Name:ferredoxin hydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogenase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the oxidation of reduced ferredoxin. Hydrogenase contains iron-sulfur clusters, and some contain nickel; it can use molecular hydrogen for the reduction of a variety of substances.
0009376	name:Name:HslUV protease complex	name:Synonym:ClpYQ protease complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses ATP-dependent protease activity; consists of an ATPase large subunit with homology to other Clp family ATPases and a peptidase small subunit related to the proteasomal beta-subunits of eukaryotes. In the E. coli complex, six identical subunits of both the ATPase, ClpY, and the protease, ClpQ, self-assemble into an oligomeric ring, and two rings of each subunit, two ClpQ rings surrounded by single ClpY rings, form a dumbbell-shaped complex.
0009380	name:Name:excinuclease repair complex	name:Synonym:excinuclease ABC complex	name:Synonym:UvrABC excinuclease complex	info:Definition:Any of the protein complexes formed by the UvrABC excinuclease system, which carries out nucleotide excision repair. Three different complexes are formed by the 3 proteins as they proceed through the excision repair process. First a complex consisting of two A subunits and one B subunit bind DNA and unwind it around the damaged site. Then, the A subunits disassociate leaving behind a stable complex between subunit B and DNA. Now, subunit C binds to this B+DNA complex and causes subunit B to nick the DNA on one side of the complex while subunit C nicks the DNA on the other side of the complex. DNA polymerase I and DNA ligase can then repair the resulting gap.
0009382	name:Name:imidazoleglycerol-phosphate synthase complex	name:Synonym:imidazoleglycerol phosphate synthase complex	info:Definition:Complex that possesses imidazoleglycerol-phosphate synthase activity.
0009390	name:Name:dimethyl sulfoxide reductase complex	name:Synonym:dimethyl sulphoxide reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation of dimethyl sulfide from dimethyl sulfoxide.
0009512	name:Name:cytochrome b6f complex	name:Synonym:cyt b(6)f complex	name:Synonym:cyt b6-f complex	name:Synonym:cyt b6/f complex	name:Synonym:cyt b6f complex	name:Synonym:cytochrome b(6)f complex	name:Synonym:cytochrome b6-f complex	name:Synonym:cytochrome b6/f complex	info:Definition:Complex that transfers electrons from reduced plastoquinone to oxidized plastocyanin and translocates protons from the stroma to the lumen. The complex contains a core structure of three catalytic subunits: cytochrome b, the Rieske iron sulfur protein (ISP), and cytochrome f, which are arranged in an integral membrane-bound dimeric complex; additional subunits are present, and vary among different species.
0009521	name:Name:photosystem	name:Synonym:reaction center	name:Synonym:reaction centre	info:Definition:A complex located in a photosynthetic membrane that consists of a photoreaction center associated with accessory pigments and electron carriers. Examples of this component are found in Arabidopsis thaliana and in photosynthetic bacterial and archaeal species.
0009522	name:Name:photosystem I	info:Definition:A photosystem that contains an iron-sulfur reaction center associated with accessory pigments and electron carriers. In cyanobacteria and chloroplasts, photosystem I functions as a light-dependent plastocyanin-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, transferring electrons from plastocyanin to ferredoxin; in photosynthetic bacteria that have only a single type I photosystem, such as the green sulfur bacteria, electrons can go either to ferredoxin (Fd) -> NAD+ or to menaquinone (MK) -> Cytb/FeS -> Cytc555 -> photosystem I (cyclic photophosphorylation).
0009523	name:Name:photosystem II	info:Definition:A photosystem that contains a pheophytin-quinone reaction center with associated accessory pigments and electron carriers. In cyanobacteria and chloroplasts, in the presence of light, PSII functions as a water-plastoquinone oxidoreductase, transferring electrons from water to plastoquinone, whereas other photosynthetic bacteria carry out anoxygenic photosynthesis and oxidize other compounds to re-reduce the photoreaction center.
0009538	name:Name:photosystem I reaction center	name:Synonym:photosystem I reaction centre	info:Definition:A photochemical system containing P700, the chlorophyll a dimer that functions as a primary electron donor. Functioning as a light-dependent plastocyanin-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, it transfers electrons from plastocyanin to ferredoxin.
0009539	name:Name:photosystem II reaction center	name:Synonym:photosystem II reaction centre	info:Definition:An integral membrane complex containing P680, the chlorophyll a molecule that functions as a primary electron donor. In the light, functioning as a water-plastoquinone oxidoreductase, it transfers electrons from water to plastoquinone.
0009544	name:Name:chloroplast ATP synthase complex	info:Definition:The protein complex that catalyzes the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP in chloroplasts.
0009654	name:Name:oxygen evolving complex	info:Definition:A complex, composed of a cluster of manganese, calcium and chloride ions bound to extrinsic proteins, that catalyzes the splitting of water to O2 and 4 H+. In cyanobacteria there are five extrinsic proteins in OEC (PsbO, PsbP-like, PsbQ-like, PsbU and PsbV), while in plants there are only three (PsbO, PsbP and PsbQ).
0009655	name:Name:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, core complex	name:Synonym:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, core complex, LHCIIa subcomplex	name:Synonym:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, core complex, LHCIIc subcomplex	name:Synonym:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, core complex, LHCIId subcomplex	info:Definition:The pigment-protein complex primarily associated to PSII in higher plants, green algae and cyanobacteria that directly transfers electrons to the reaction center.
0009656	name:Name:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, peripheral complex	info:Definition:Pigment-protein complex primarily associated to PSII in plants, green algae and cyanobacteria. Involved in state transitions that cause migration to PSI under certain environmental conditions such as high light.
0009782	name:Name:photosystem I antenna complex	info:Definition:The antenna complex of photosystem I. A photosystem has two closely linked components, an antenna containing light-absorbing pigments and a reaction center. Each antenna contains one or more light-harvesting complexes (LHCs).
0009783	name:Name:photosystem II antenna complex	info:Definition:The antenna complex of photosystem II. A photosystem has two closely linked components, an antenna containing light-absorbing pigments and a reaction center. Each antenna contains one or more light-harvesting complexes (LHCs).
0009921	name:Name:auxin efflux carrier complex	info:Definition:The protein complex associated with the plasma membrane of certain plant cells (e.g. root cortex, epidermal cells) that functions to transport auxin out of the cell.
0009923	name:Name:fatty acid elongase complex	info:Definition:A tetrameric complex of four different subunits which catalyzes the elongation of fatty acids chains 2 carbon units at a time in the synthesis of very long chain fatty acids.
0010006	name:Name:Toc complex	info:Definition:Protein translocon complex at the chloroplast outer membrane.
0010007	name:Name:magnesium chelatase complex	info:Definition:A heterotrimeric enzyme complex composed of three subunits, all of which are required for enzyme activity, which catalyzes the chelation of Mg by proto IX in an ATP-dependent manner.
0010169	name:Name:thioglucosidase complex	name:Synonym:myrosinase complex	info:Definition:A large (200-800 kDa) multiprotein complex formed by 70-kDa and 5-kDa myrosinases, myrosinase- binding proteins (MBPs), MBP-related proteins and myrosinase-associated proteins. The complex has been identified in Brassica napus seeds.
0010170	name:Name:glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase complex	info:Definition:Complex that catalyzes the synthesis of ADP-glucose and pyrophosphate from glucose-1-phosphate and ATP. In plants, the complex is a heterotetramer composed of two types of subunits (small and large). In bacteria, the enzyme complex is composed of four identical subunits.
0010278	name:Name:chloroplast outer membrane translocon	info:Definition:The protein transport machinery of the chloroplast outer membrane that contains at least three components Toc159, Toc75 and Toc34, interacts with precursor proteins which are imported into the chloroplast in a GTP dependant manner.
0010316	name:Name:pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase complex	name:Synonym:PFK complex	info:Definition:Heterodimeric complex that catalyzes the pyrophosphate-dependent phosphorylation of D-fructose 6-phosphate into D-fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.
0010317	name:Name:pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase complex, alpha-subunit complex	name:Synonym:PFK complex, alpha-subunit	info:Definition:Refers to the alpha subunit of the heterodimeric complex that possesses pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase activity.
0010318	name:Name:pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase complex, beta-subunit complex	name:Synonym:PFK complex, beta-subunit	info:Definition:Refers to the beta subunit of the heterodimeric complex that possesses pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase activity.
0010330	name:Name:cellulose synthase complex	info:Definition:The multimeric protein complex, organized in a rosette, which catalyzes the biosynthesis of cellulose for the plant cell wall.
0010598	name:Name:NAD(P)H dehydrogenase complex (plastoquinone)	info:Definition:Complex that possesses NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (plastoquinone) activity. The complex is one of the components of the electron transport chain. It is involved in electron transport from an unidentified electron donor, possibly NADH, NADPH or ferredoxin(Fd) to the plastoquinone pool.
0015050	name:Name:methane monooxygenase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses methane monooxygenase activity; dimeric and trimeric complexes have been characterized.
0015627	name:Name:type II protein secretion system complex	name:Synonym:general secretion pathway-associated complex	name:Synonym:main terminal branch	name:Synonym:MTB	name:Synonym:Sec-dependent secretion system-associated complex	name:Synonym:T2SS-associated complexes	info:Definition:A large protein complex, containing 12-15 subunits, that spans the cell envelope of Gram-negative bacteria and mediates the movement of proteins into the extracellular environment. The complex includes a component in the cytoplasm, an inner membrane subcomplex that reaches into the periplasmic compartment and a secretion pore in the outer membrane. Proteins using the Type II pathway are transported across the cytoplasmic membrane by the Sec or Tat complex.
0016010	name:Name:dystrophin-associated glycoprotein complex	name:Synonym:DGC	name:Synonym:dystrophin glycoprotein complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that forms a strong mechanical link between the cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix; typical of, but not confined to, muscle cells. The complex is composed of transmembrane, cytoplasmic, and extracellular proteins, including dystrophin, sarcoglycans, dystroglycan, dystrobrevins, syntrophins, sarcospan, caveolin-3, and NO synthase.
0016011	name:Name:dystroglycan complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that includes alpha- and beta-dystroglycan, which are alternative products of the same gene; the laminin-binding component of the dystrophin-associated glycoprotein complex, providing a link between the subsarcolemmal cytoskeleton (in muscle cells) and the extracellular matrix. Alpha-dystroglycan is an extracellular protein binding to alpha-laminin and to beta-dystroglycan; beta-dystroglycan is a transmembrane protein which binds alpha-dystroglycan and dystrophin.
0016012	name:Name:sarcoglycan complex	name:Synonym:sarcoglycan-sarcospan complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed of four sarcoglycans plus sarcospan; there are six known sarcoglycans: alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta-, epsilon- and zeta-sarcoglycan; all are N-glycosylated single-pass transmembrane proteins. The sarcoglycan-sarcospan complex is a subcomplex of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex, and is fixed to the dystrophin axis by a lateral association with the dystroglycan complex.
0016013	name:Name:syntrophin complex	name:Synonym:nitric oxide synthase-dystrophin complex, skeletal muscle	info:Definition:A protein complex that includes alpha-, beta1-, beta2-syntrophins and syntrophin-like proteins; the syntrophin complex binds to the second half of the carboxy-terminal domain of dystrophin; also associates with neuronal nitric oxide synthase.
0016014	name:Name:dystrobrevin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex comprising alpha- and beta-dystrobrevin; forms part of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex.
0016027	name:Name:inaD signaling complex	name:Synonym:inaD signalling complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins that are involved in phototransduction and attached to the transient receptor potential (TRP) channel. The protein connections are mediated through inaD.
0016222	name:Name:procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex	name:Synonym:procollagen-proline, 2-oxoglutarate-4-dioxygenase complex	name:Synonym:prolyl 4-hydroxylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the formation of procollagen trans-4-hydroxy-L-proline and succinate from procollagen L-proline and 2-oxoglutarate, requiring Fe2+ and ascorbate. Contains two alpha subunits that contribute to most parts of the catalytic sites, and two beta subunits that are identical to protein-disulfide isomerase.
0070386	name:Name:procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(I) type	name:Synonym:procollagen-proline, 2-oxoglutarate-4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(I) type	name:Synonym:prolyl 4-hydroxylase complex (alpha(I)-type)	info:Definition:A procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex that contains alpha subunits of the type I isoform; its activity is readily inhibited by poly(L-proline).
0070387	name:Name:procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(II) type	name:Synonym:procollagen-proline, 2-oxoglutarate-4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(II) type	name:Synonym:prolyl 4-hydroxylase complex (alpha(II)-type)	info:Definition:A procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex that contains alpha subunits of the type II isoform; its activity is inhibited by poly(L-proline) only at high concentrations.
0070388	name:Name:procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(III) type	name:Synonym:procollagen-proline, 2-oxoglutarate-4-dioxygenase complex, alpha(III) type	name:Synonym:prolyl 4-hydroxylase complex (alpha(III)-type)	info:Definition:A procollagen-proline 4-dioxygenase complex that contains alpha subunits of the type III isoform.
0016272	name:Name:prefoldin complex	name:Synonym:GIM complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit chaperone that acts to delivers unfolded proteins to cytosolic chaperonin. In humans, the complex is a heterohexamer of two PFD-alpha and four PFD-beta type subunits.
0016281	name:Name:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4F complex	name:Synonym:eIF-4F	name:Synonym:eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 complex	info:Definition:The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4F complex is composed of eIF4E, eIF4A and eIF4G; it is involved in the recognition of the mRNA cap, ATP-dependent unwinding of the 5'-terminal secondary structure and recruitment of the mRNA to the ribosome.
0016342	name:Name:catenin complex	info:Definition:Complex of peripheral cytoplasmic proteins (alpha-, beta- and gamma-catenin) that interact with the cytoplasmic region of uvomorulin/E-cadherin to connect it to the actin cytoskeleton.
0016459	name:Name:myosin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex, formed of one or more myosin heavy chains plus associated light chains and other proteins, that functions as a molecular motor; uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move actin filaments or to move vesicles or other cargo on fixed actin filaments; has magnesium-ATPase activity and binds actin. Myosin classes are distinguished based on sequence features of the motor, or head, domain, but also have distinct tail regions that are believed to bind specific cargoes.
0016460	name:Name:myosin II complex	name:Synonym:conventional myosin	info:Definition:A myosin complex containing two class II myosin heavy chains, two myosin essential light chains and two myosin regulatory light chains. Also known as classical myosin or conventional myosin, the myosin II class includes the major muscle myosin of vertebrate and invertebrate muscle, and is characterized by alpha-helical coiled coil tails that self assemble to form a variety of filament structures.
0016461	name:Name:unconventional myosin complex	name:Synonym:non-muscle myosin	info:Definition:A portmanteau term for myosins other than myosin II.
0032982	name:Name:myosin filament	name:Synonym:myosin thick filament	name:Synonym:thick filament	info:Definition:A protein complex containing myosin heavy chains, plus associated light chains and other proteins, in which the myosin heavy chains are arranged into a filament.
0042642	name:Name:actomyosin, myosin complex part	info:Definition:The myosin part of any complex of actin, myosin, and accessory proteins.
0016465	name:Name:chaperonin ATPase complex	info:Definition:Multisubunit protein complex with 2x7 (Type I, in most cells) or 2x8 (Type II, in Archaea) ATP-binding sites involved in maintaining an unfolded polypeptide structure before folding or to entry into mitochondria and chloroplasts.
0016469	name:Name:proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting two-sector ATPase complex	name:Synonym:vacuolar hydrogen-transporting ATPase	info:Definition:A large protein complex that catalyzes the synthesis or hydrolysis of ATP by a rotational mechanism, coupled to the transport of protons across a membrane. The complex comprises a membrane sector (F0, V0, or A0) that carries out proton transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (F1, V1, or A1) that catalyzes ATP synthesis or hydrolysis. Two major types have been characterized: V-type ATPases couple ATP hydrolysis to the transport of protons across a concentration gradient, whereas F-type ATPases, also known as ATP synthases, normally run in the reverse direction to utilize energy from a proton concentration or electrochemical gradient to synthesize ATP. A third type, A-type ATPases have been found in archaea, and are closely related to eukaryotic V-type ATPases but are reversible.
0033176	name:Name:proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-translocating V-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex that couples ATP hydrolysis to the transport of protons across a concentration gradient. The resulting transmembrane electrochemical potential of H+ is used to drive a variety of (i) secondary active transport systems via H+-dependent symporters and antiporters and (ii) channel-mediated transport systems. The complex comprises a membrane sector (V0) that carries out proton transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (V1) that catalyzes ATP hydrolysis. V-type ATPases are found in the membranes of organelles such as vacuoles, endosomes, and lysosomes, and in the plasma membrane.
0045259	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-translocating F-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase complex	name:Synonym:proton-transporting F-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex that catalyzes the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP during oxidative phosphorylation. The complex comprises a membrane sector (F0) that carries out proton transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (F1) that catalyzes ATP synthesis by a rotational mechanism; the extramembrane sector (containing 3 a and 3 b subunits) is connected via the d-subunit to the membrane sector by several smaller subunits. Within this complex, the g and e subunits and the 9-12 c subunits rotate by consecutive 120 degree angles and perform parts of ATP synthesis. This movement is driven by the hydrogen ion electrochemical potential gradient.
0016472	name:Name:sodium ion-transporting two-sector ATPase complex	name:Synonym:sodium-transporting two-sector ATPase complex	info:Definition:A large protein complex that catalyzes the synthesis or hydrolysis of ATP by a rotational mechanism, coupled to the transport of sodium ions across a membrane. The complex comprises a membrane sector (F0 or V0) that carries out ion transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (F1 or V1) that catalyzes ATP synthesis or hydrolysis.
0016473	name:Name:sodium ion-transporting F-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:sodium-translocating F-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A sodium ion-transporting two-sector ATPase complex that catalyzes the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP. The complex comprises a membrane sector (F0) that carries out proton transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (F1) that catalyzes ATP synthesis by a rotational mechanism.
0016474	name:Name:sodium ion-transporting V-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:sodium-translocating V-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A sodium ion-transporting two-sector ATPase complex that couples ATP hydrolysis to the transport of sodium ions across a concentration gradient. The complex comprises a membrane sector (V0) that carries out proton transport and a cytoplasmic compartment sector (V1) that catalyzes ATP hydrolysis.
0016507	name:Name:fatty acid beta-oxidation multienzyme complex	name:Synonym:trifunctional enzyme	info:Definition:A complex that includes the long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase and long-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase activities in two subunits (alpha and beta), catalyzing two steps of the fatty acid beta-oxidation cycle within the mitochondrial matrix.
0016585	name:Name:chromatin remodeling complex	name:Synonym:chromatin remodelling complex	name:Synonym:nucleosome remodeling complex	info:Definition:Any complex that mediates dynamic changes in eukaryotic chromatin.
0000118	name:Name:histone deacetylase complex	name:Synonym:HDAC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses histone deacetylase activity.
0000812	name:Name:Swr1 complex	name:Synonym:SWR-C	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex that is involved in chromatin remodeling. It is required for the incorporation of the histone variant H2AZ into chromatin. In S. cerevisiae, the complex contains Swr1p, a Swi2/Snf2-related ATPase, and 12 additional subunits.
0005677	name:Name:chromatin silencing complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that mediates changes in chromatin structure that result in transcriptional silencing.
0008623	name:Name:chromatin accessibility complex	name:Synonym:CHRAC	name:Synonym:ISW2 complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that uses ATP to increase the general accessibility of DNA in chromatin. Unlike other known chromatin remodeling complexes, CHRAC can also function during chromatin assembly; it uses ATP to convert irregular chromatin into a regular array of nucleosomes with even spacing.
0016586	name:Name:RSC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex similar to, but more abundant than, the Swi/Snf complex. The RSC complex is generally recruited to RNA polymerase III promoters and is specifically recruited to RNA polymerase II promoters by transcriptional activators and repressors; it is also involved in non-homologous end joining.
0031010	name:Name:ISWI complex	info:Definition:Any chromatin remodeling complex that contains an ATPase subunit of the ISWI family.
0031011	name:Name:Ino80 complex	name:Synonym:INO80 chromatin remodeling complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex that contains the Ino80p ATPase; exhibits chromatin remodeling activity and 3' to 5' DNA helicase activity.
0031213	name:Name:RSF complex	name:Synonym:remodeling and spacing factor complex 	info:Definition:A chromatin remodeling complex that mediates nucleosome deposition and generates regularly spaced nucleosome arrays. In humans, the complex is composed of the ATPase hSNF2H and the HBXAP protein (RSF-1).
0035059	name:Name:RCAF complex	name:Synonym:replication-coupling assembly factor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that facilitates the assembly of nucleosomes on to newly synthesized DNA. In Drosophila, the complex comprises ASF1 and histones H3 and H4.
0048188	name:Name:Set1C/COMPASS complex	name:Synonym:COMPASS complex	name:Synonym:Set1/COMPASS complex	name:Synonym:Set1C	info:Definition:A conserved protein complex that catalyzes methylation of histone H3. In Saccharomyces the complex contains Shg1p, Sdc1p, Swd1p, Swd2p, Swd3p, Spp1p, Bre2p, and the trithorax-related Set1p; in mammals it contains the catalytic subunit (SETD1A or SETD1B), WDR5, WDR82, RBBP5, ASH2L/ASH2, CXXC1/CFP1, HCFC1 and DPY30.
0048189	name:Name:Lid2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is thought to be involved in regulation of chromatin remodeling. In Schizosaccharomyces the complex contains Lid1p, Ash2p, Ecm5p, Snt2p, and Sdc1p.
0070209	name:Name:ASTRA complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is part of the chromatin remodeling machinery; the acronym stands for ASsembly of Tel, Rvb and Atm-like kinase. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae this complex includes Rvb1p, Rvb2p, Tra1p, Tel2p, Asa1p, Ttilp and Tti2p.
0070311	name:Name:nucleosomal methylation activator complex	name:Synonym:NUMAC	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains eight subunits in common with the SWI/SNF complex, plus the ATPase BRG1 (SMARCA4) and the histone methyltransferase CARM1; the complex is involved in regulating nuclear receptor-dependent transcription.
0070603	name:Name:SWI/SNF-type complex	name:Synonym:SWI-SNF global transcription activator complex 	name:Synonym:SWI-SNF-type complex	info:Definition:A chromatin remodeling complex that contains an ortholog of the Saccharomyces ATPase Swi2/Snf2 as one of the core components.
0016591	name:Name:DNA-directed RNA polymerase II, holoenzyme	info:Definition:Large protein complex composed of the RNA polymerase core complex and a variety of other proteins including transcription factor complexes TFIIA, D, E, F, and H which are required for promoter recognition, and the Mediator subcomplex. Catalyzes the synthesis of eukaryotic pre-mRNA.
0016592	name:Name:mediator complex	name:Synonym:CDK8-containing TRAP/mediator complex	name:Synonym:L mediator complex	name:Synonym:Srb-mediator complex	name:Synonym:TRAP complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that interacts with the carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II and plays an active role in transducing the signal from a transcription factor to the transcriptional machinery. The mediator complex is required for activation of transcription of most protein-coding genes, but can also act as a transcriptional corepressor. The Saccharomyces complex contains several identifiable subcomplexes: a head domain comprising Srb2, -4, and -5, Med6, -8, and -11, and Rox3 proteins; a middle domain comprising Med1, -4, and -7, Nut1 and -2, Cse2, Rgr1, Soh1, and Srb7 proteins; a tail consisting of Gal11p, Med2p, Pgd1p, and Sin4p; and a regulatory subcomplex comprising Ssn2, -3, and -8, and Srb8 proteins. Metazoan mediator complexes have similar modular structures and include homologs of yeast Srb and Med proteins.
0016600	name:Name:flotillin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains flotillin-1 and flotillin-2, and may contain associated proteins. Flotillins associate into membrane microdomains resembling caveolae.
0016610	name:Name:nitrogenase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex composed of two proteins, dinitrogenase and nitrogenase reductase; dinitrogenase is tetrameric with an alpha2-beta2 structure and nitrogenase reductase is a homodimer, and both are associated with metal ions, which differ between species. Both proteins are required for the enzyme activity of the complex, the formation of oxidized ferredoxin and ammonia from reduced ferredoxin and nitrogen.
0016611	name:Name:iron-iron nitrogenase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex containing an iron-iron cluster found in species such as the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus. It is composed of two main subunits, dinitrogenase and nitrogenase reductase. Dinitrogenase, the iron-iron containing subunit, has an alpha1-beta2 or alpha2-beta2 structure, and the nitrogenase reductase subunit is a homodimer. Functions in the catalysis of the formation of oxidized ferredoxin and ammonia from reduced ferredoxin and nitrogen.
0016612	name:Name:molybdenum-iron nitrogenase complex	name:Synonym:molybdenum-iron nitrogenase activity	info:Definition:An enzyme complex containing a molybdenum-iron cluster found in many species. It is composed of two proteins, dinitrogenase and nitrogenase reductase; dinitrogenase, the molybdenum-iron protein, is tetrameric with an alpha2-beta2 structure, and nitrogenase reductase is a homodimer.
0016613	name:Name:vanadium-iron nitrogenase complex	name:Synonym:vanadium-iron nitrogenase activity	info:Definition:An enzyme complex containing a vanadium-iron cluster found in some species, such as Azotobacter vinelandii. It is composed of two proteins, dinitrogenase and nitrogenase reductase; dinitrogenase, the vanadium-iron protein, is tetrameric with an alpha2-beta2 structure, and nitrogenase reductase is a homodimer.
0016914	name:Name:follicle-stimulating hormone complex	name:Synonym:follicle stimulating hormone complex	name:Synonym:FSH complex	info:Definition:A gonadotrophic glycoprotein hormone secreted, in mammals, by the anterior pituitary gland; consists of alpha and beta subunits, the latter of which confers hormonal specificity.
0016942	name:Name:insulin-like growth factor binding protein complex	name:Synonym:IGF binding protein complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins which includes the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and a number of IGF-binding proteins. The complex plays a role in growth and development.
0042567	name:Name:insulin-like growth factor ternary complex	name:Synonym:IGF ternary complex	info:Definition:A complex of three proteins, which in animals is approximately 150kDa and consists of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF), the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), or -5 (IGFBP-5) and an acid-labile subunit (ALS). The complex plays a role in growth and development.
0042568	name:Name:insulin-like growth factor binary complex	name:Synonym:IGF binary complex	info:Definition:A complex of two proteins, which in animals is 50kDa and consists of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and one of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), -2 (IGFBP-2), -4 (IGFBP-4) and -6 (IGFBP-6). The complex plays a role in growth and development.
0017053	name:Name:transcriptional repressor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses activity that prevents or downregulates transcription.
0016581	name:Name:NuRD complex	name:Synonym:Mi-2 complex	name:Synonym:NRD complex	name:Synonym:nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation complex	info:Definition:An approximately 2 MDa multi-subunit complex that exhibits ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling activity in addition to histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, and has been shown to establish transcriptional repression of a number of target genes in vertebrates, invertebrates and fungi. Amongst its subunits, the NuRD complex contains histone deacetylases, histone binding proteins and Mi-2-like proteins.
0017054	name:Name:negative cofactor 2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that can stably associate with TATA-binding protein on promoters, thereby preventing the assembly of transcription factors TFIIA and TFIIB and leading to repression of RNA polymerase II transcription. The two subunits, NC2alpha (Drap1) and NC2beta (Dr1), dimerize through histone fold domains of the H2A/H2B type present in the amino termini.
0070176	name:Name:DRM complex	name:Synonym:DP/Rb/MuvB	info:Definition:A transcriptional repressor complex that contains the lin-9, lin-35, lin-37, lin-52, lin-53, lin-5is involved in 4-, dpl-1 and efl-1 proteins, and is involved in cell fate specification.
0070439	name:Name:Mad-Max-mSin3A complex	info:Definition:A transcriptional repressor complex that contains a heterodimer of the bHLH-ZIP proteins Mad and Max, plus mSin3A, a homolog of the yeast Sin3p.
0070440	name:Name:Mad-Max-mSin3B complex	info:Definition:A transcriptional repressor complex that contains a heterodimer of the bHLH-ZIP proteins Mad and Max, plus mSin3B, a homolog of the yeast Sin3p.
0070443	name:Name:Mad-Max complex	info:Definition:A transcriptional repressor complex that consists of a heterodimer of the bHLH-ZIP proteins Mad and Max.
0070722	name:Name:Tle3-Aes complex	name:Synonym:Grg3b-Grg5 complex	info:Definition:A transcriptional repressor complex that consists of a heterodimer of the proteins Tle3 (also known as Grg3b) and Aes (Grg5), which are homologs of the Drosophila groucho gene product.
0070824	name:Name:SHREC complex	info:Definition:A histone deacetylase complex that contains a core of four proteins -- Clr1, Clr2, Clr3, and Mit1 in fission yeast -- and localizes to all heterochromatic regions in the genome as well as some euchromatic sites. The complex is involved in regulating nucleosome positioning to assemble higher-order chromatin structures.
0017086	name:Name:3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) complex	name:Synonym:BCADH	name:Synonym:branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the reaction 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate + lipoamide = S-(2-methylpropanoyl)-dihydrolipoamide + carbon dioxide (CO2). This requires thiamine diphosphate; the enzyme also acts on (S)-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoate and 4-methyl-2-oxo-pentanoate.
0017087	name:Name:mitochondrial processing peptidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a catalytic alpha subunit (alpha-MPP) and a regulatory beta subunit (beta-MPP), and catalyzes the release of N-terminal targeting peptides from precursor proteins imported into the mitochondrion.
0017090	name:Name:meprin A complex	name:Synonym:PABA peptide hydrolase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is located in the cell membrane, and is involved in the metabolism of peptides, including neuropeptides. The complex has metalloendopeptidase activity that catalyzes the hydrolysis of protein and peptide substrates, preferentially on carboxyl side of hydrophobic residues.
0017101	name:Name:aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase multienzyme complex	name:Synonym:aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex	name:Synonym:multisynthetase complex	info:Definition:A multienzyme complex found in all multicellular eukaryotes composed of eight proteins with aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase activities (abbreviated as: ArgRS, AspRS, GluProRS, GlnRS, IleRS, LeuRS, LysRS, MetRS where RS is the enzyme, preceded by the amino acid it uses as a substrate) as well as three non-synthetase proteins (p43, p38, and p18) with diverse functions. Several of these subunits are known dimers, so the total polypeptide count in the multisynthetase complex is at least fifteen. All of the enzymes in this assembly catalyze the same reaction, the covalent attachment of an amino acid to either the 2'- or 3'-hydroxyl of the 3'-terminal adenosine of tRNA, but using different substrates.
0017102	name:Name:methionyl glutamyl tRNA synthetase complex	info:Definition:A complex consisting of methionyl- and glutamyl-tRNA synthetases. The tRNA synthetases present in the complex bind to their cognate tRNAs more efficiently than they do as monomers.
0017109	name:Name:glutamate-cysteine ligase complex	name:Synonym:gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the ligation of glutamate to cysteine, forming glutamylcysteine.
0017119	name:Name:Golgi transport complex	name:Synonym:COG complex	name:Synonym:conserved oligomeric Golgi complex	name:Synonym:Sec34/35 complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins that, in vitro, stimulates intra-Golgi transport; a 13S complex, about 800 kDa in size and consists of at least five polypeptides. In yeast, this complex is called the Sec34/35 complex and is composed of eight subunits (Sec34p, Sec35p, Dor1p, Cod1p, Cod2p, Cod3p, Cod4p, and Cod5p).
0017122	name:Name:protein N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:O-GlcNAc transferase complex	name:Synonym:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-peptide N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase	info:Definition:Heterotrimeric enzyme complex, which in humans is composed of two large subunits of the same size, and one smaller subunit. Functions in the addition of nucleotide-activated sugars onto the polypeptide.
0017177	name:Name:alpha-glucosidase II complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric complex that catalyzes the trimming of glucose residues from N-linked core glycans on newly synthesized glycoproteins.
0018444	name:Name:translation release factor complex	name:Synonym:eukaryotic peptide chain release factor	name:Synonym:peptide chain release factor	info:Definition:A heterodimeric complex involved in the release of a nascent polypeptide chain from a ribosome.
0019008	name:Name:molybdopterin synthase complex	name:Synonym:molybdopterin converting factor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses molybdopterin synthase activity. In E. coli, the complex is a heterotetramer consisting of two MoaD and two MoaE subunits.
0019034	name:Name:viral replication complex	info:Definition:Specific locations and structures in the virus infected cell involved in replicating the viral genome.
0019035	name:Name:viral integration complex	info:Definition:Virus-specific complex of protein required for integrating viral genomes into the host genome.
0019036	name:Name:viral transcriptional complex	info:Definition:Specific locations and structures in the virus infected cell involved in transcribing the viral genome.
0019197	name:Name:phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sugar phosphotransferase complex	info:Definition:Includes phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphatase (enzyme I of the phosphotransferase system) and protein-N(PI)-phosphohistidine-sugar phosphotransferase (enzyme II of the phosphotransferase system).
0019773	name:Name:proteasome core complex, alpha-subunit complex	info:Definition:The proteasome core subcomplex that constitutes the two outer rings of the proteasome core complex. An example of this component is found in Mus musculus.
0031604	name:Name:nuclear proteasome core complex, alpha-subunit complex	info:Definition:The subunits forming the outer ring of the core complex of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031605	name:Name:ER proteasome core complex, alpha-subunit complex	info:Definition:The subunits forming the outer ring of the core complex of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031606	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome core complex, alpha-subunit complex	info:Definition:The proteasome core subcomplex that constitutes the two outer rings of the cytosolic proteasome core complex.
0019774	name:Name:proteasome core complex, beta-subunit complex	info:Definition:The proteasome core subcomplex that constitutes the two inner rings of the proteasome core complex. An example of this component is found in Mus musculus.
0031607	name:Name:nuclear proteasome core complex, beta-subunit complex	info:Definition:The subunits forming the inner ring of the core complex of a proteasome located in the nucleus of a cell.
0031608	name:Name:ER proteasome core complex, beta-subunit complex	info:Definition:The subunits forming the inner ring of the core complex of a proteasome located in the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0031609	name:Name:cytosolic proteasome core complex, beta-subunit complex	info:Definition:The proteasome core subcomplex that constitutes the two inner rings of the cytosolic proteasome core complex.
0019812	name:Name:Type I site-specific deoxyribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:Type I restriction enzyme complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex composed of two copies of a restriction (R) subunit, two copies of a methylation (M) subunit, and one copy of a specificity (S) subunit. This complex recognizes specific short DNA sequences (through the S subunit), and binds to them. If the recognition site is hemimethylated, the complex acts as a methyltransferase which modifies the recognition site, using S-adenosylmethionine as the methyl donor. Only the M and S subunits are required for this reaction. If the complex binds to an unmethylated recognition site, then the complex translocates the DNA bidirectionally in an ATP-dependent manner. When the translocation is stalled by impact with another complex or unusual DNA structure, the enzyme functions as an endonuclease and cleavage of the DNA will occur, hundreds or thousands of base pairs away from the recognition site. These DNA restriction systems are used by bacteria to defend against phage and other foreign DNA that may enter a cell.
0019813	name:Name:Type III site-specific deoxyribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:Type III restriction enzyme complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme complex composed of two subunits, Res and Mod, that functions as an endonuclease and cleaves DNA. Cleavage will only occur when there are two un-methylated copies of a specific recognition site in an inverse orientation on the DNA. Cleavage occurs at a specific distance away from one of the recognition sites. The Mod subunit can act alone as a methyltansferase. DNA restriction systems such as this are used by bacteria to defend against phage and other foreign DNA that may enter a cell.
0019814	name:Name:immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that in its canonical form is composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds and sometimes complexed with additional proteins. An immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0019815	name:Name:B cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:antibody	name:Synonym:B cell receptor accessory molecule complex	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:B-cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:BCR complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin complex, membrane bound	info:Definition:An immunoglobulin complex that is present in the plasma membrane of B cells and that in its canonical form is composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains and two identical immunoglobulin light chains and a signaling subunit, a heterodimer of the Ig-alpha and Ig-beta proteins.
0042571	name:Name:immunoglobulin complex, circulating	name:Synonym:antibody	info:Definition:An immunoglobulin complex that is secreted into extracellular space and found in mucosal areas or other tissues or circulating in the blood or lymph. In its canonical form, a circulating immunoglobulin complex is composed of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. Some forms of are polymers of the basic structure and contain additional components such as J-chain and the secretory component.
0071735	name:Name:IgG immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:IgG1	name:Synonym:IgG2	name:Synonym:IgG2a	name:Synonym:IgG2b	name:Synonym:IgG2c	name:Synonym:IgG3	name:Synonym:IgG4	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of an IgG isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgG immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071738	name:Name:IgD immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgD isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgD immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071742	name:Name:IgE immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgE isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgE immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071745	name:Name:IgA immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:IgA1 antibody	name:Synonym:IgA2 antibody	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgA isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds, and sometimes complexed with J chain or J chain and secretory component. An IgA immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071753	name:Name:IgM immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgM isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds, and in its circulating form complexed with J chain in polymeric forms. An IgM immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071758	name:Name:IgW immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgW isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgW immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071759	name:Name:IgX immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgX isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgX immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071760	name:Name:IgY immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgY isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. An IgY immunoglobulin complex may be embedded in the plasma membrane or present in the extracellular space, in mucosal areas or other tissues, or circulating in the blood or lymph.
0071761	name:Name:IgZ immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:IgT antibody	name:Synonym:IgT immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:IgZ antibody	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgZ isotype and two identical immunoglobulin light chains, held together by disulfide bonds. The IgZ isotype is also known as the IgT isotype in certain species of fish.
0071762	name:Name:heavy chain immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:HCab	name:Synonym:Ig NAR immunoglobulin complex	name:Synonym:IgNAR antibody	name:Synonym:IgNAR immunoglobulin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains of the IgNAR isotype held together by disulfide bonds and lacking immunoglobulin light chains.
0019907	name:Name:cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase holoenzyme complex	name:Synonym:CAK complex	name:Synonym:CDK-activating kinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that phosphorylates cyclin-dependent kinases such as Cdc2 on Thr161 (or an equivalent residue); contains a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit, and some examples also include an assembly factor.
0022623	name:Name:proteasome-activating nucleotidase complex	name:Synonym:PAN	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that recognizes and unfolds core proteasome substrate proteins, and translocates them to the core complex in an ATP dependent manner.
0022624	name:Name:proteasome accessory complex	info:Definition:A protein complex, that caps one or both ends of the proteasome core complex and regulates entry into, or exit from, the proteasome core complex.
0030008	name:Name:TRAPP complex	name:Synonym:transport protein particle	name:Synonym:TRAPP1	name:Synonym:TRAPP2	info:Definition:A large complex present on the cis-Golgi that acts prior to SNARE complex assembly to mediate vesicle docking and fusion. Ras guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor activity has been demonstrated for this complex in S. cerevisiae.
0030015	name:Name:CCR4-NOT core complex	info:Definition:The core of the CCR4-NOT transcription factor complex. In Saccharomyces the CCR4-NOT core complex comprises Ccr4p, Caf1p, Not1p, Not2p, Not3p, Not4p, and Not5p.
0030076	name:Name:light-harvesting complex	name:Synonym:antenna complex	info:Definition:A protein-pigment complex that may be closely or peripherally associated to photosynthetic reaction centers that participate in harvesting and transferring radiant energy to the reaction center.
0009503	name:Name:thylakoid light-harvesting complex	info:Definition:A thylakoid membrane complex of chlorophylls a and b together with chlorophyll a-b binding proteins. In addition, LHCs contain a number of other proteins, the function of which is speculative, together with accessory pigments. The LHCs capture and transfer energy to photosystems I and II. An example of this is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0030077	name:Name:plasma membrane light-harvesting complex	info:Definition:A plasma membrane protein-pigment complex that may be closely or peripherally associated to photosynthetic reaction centers that participate in harvesting and transferring radiant energy to the reaction center. Examples of this complex are found in bacterial species.
0030089	name:Name:phycobilisome	info:Definition:Any of the granules, approximately 32 nm x 48 nm and consisting of highly aggregated phycobiliproteins, that are attached in arrays to the external face of a thylakoid membrane in algae of the phyla Cyanophyta and Rhodophyta, where they function as light-harvesting devices in photosynthesis. Excitation energy in the phycobilisome flows in the sequence: phycoerythrin, phycocyanin, allophycocyanin before passing to the antenna chlorophyll of photosystem II.
0030080	name:Name:B875 antenna complex	name:Synonym:LH1 complex	name:Synonym:light harvesting complex I	info:Definition:Protein complex that surrounds and transfers excitation energy directly to the bacterial reaction center; binds bacteriochlorophyll a and has a single absorption band between 870 and 890 nm.
0030081	name:Name:B800-820 antenna complex	name:Synonym:LH3 complex	name:Synonym:light harvesting complex III	info:Definition:Protein-pigment complex that absorbs light at 800 and 820 nm; is peripherally associated to the bacterial reaction center; transfers excitation energy to the B875 antenna complex.
0030082	name:Name:B800-850 antenna complex	name:Synonym:LH2 complex	name:Synonym:light harvesting complex II	info:Definition:Protein-pigment complex that absorbs light at 800 and 850 nm; is peripherally associated to the bacterial reaction center; transfers excitation energy to the B875 antenna complex.
0030085	name:Name:PSII associated light-harvesting complex II, peripheral complex, LHCIIb subcomplex	info:Definition:A pigment protein complex that forms part of the photosystem II associated light-harvesting complex II; contains two proteins (usually about 28 and 27 kDa), and may contain a third; peripherally located relative to other LHC polypeptides.
0030117	name:Name:membrane coat	info:Definition:Any of several different proteinaceous coats that can associate with membranes. Membrane coats include those formed by clathrin plus an adaptor complex, the COPI and COPII complexes, and possibly others. They are found associated with membranes on many vesicles as well as other membrane features such as pits and perhaps tubules.
0030118	name:Name:clathrin coat	name:Synonym:clathrin cage	info:Definition:A membrane coat found on coated pits and some coated vesicles; consists of polymerized clathrin triskelions, each comprising three clathrin heavy chains and three clathrin light chains, linked to the membrane via one of the AP adaptor complexes.
0030120	name:Name:vesicle coat	info:Definition:A membrane coat found on a coated vesicle.
0030119	name:Name:AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex	name:Synonym:clathrin adaptor	info:Definition:Any of several heterotetrameric complexes that link clathrin (or another coat-forming molecule, as hypothesized for AP-3 and AP-4) to a membrane surface; they are found on coated pits and coated vesicles, and mediate sorting of cargo proteins into vesicles. Each AP complex contains two large (a beta and one of either an alpha, gamma, delta, or epsilon) subunits (110-130 kDa), a medium (mu) subunit (approximately 50 kDa), and a small (sigma) subunit (15-20 kDa).
0030123	name:Name:AP-3 adaptor complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of beta3, delta, mu3 and sigma3 subunits and is found associated with endosomal membranes. AP-3 does not appear to associate with clathrin in all organisms. In at least humans, the AP-3 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different genes (beta3A and beta3B, mu3A and mu3B, and sigma3A and sigma3B).
0030124	name:Name:AP-4 adaptor complex	info:Definition:An AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of beta4, epsilon, mu4 and sigma4 subunits and is found associated with membranes in the trans-Golgi network; it is not clear whether AP-4 forms clathrin coats in vivo.
0030131	name:Name:clathrin adaptor complex	info:Definition:A membrane coat adaptor complex that links clathrin to a membrane.
0030256	name:Name:type I protein secretion system complex	name:Synonym:ABC translocator complex	info:Definition:A complex of three secretory proteins that carry out secretion in the type I secretion system: an inner membrane transport ATPase (termed ABC protein for ATP-binding cassette), which provides the energy for protein secretion; an outer membrane protein, which is exported via the sec pathway; and a membrane fusion protein, which is anchored in the inner membrane and spans the periplasmic space.
0030257	name:Name:type III protein secretion system complex	name:Synonym:T3SS complex	name:Synonym:TTSS complex	info:Definition:A complex of approximately 20 proteins, most of which are located in the cytoplasmic membrane that carries out protein secretion in the bacterial type III secretion system; type III secretion also requires a cytoplasmic, probably membrane-associated ATPase.
0030314	name:Name:junctional membrane complex	name:Synonym:triad junction	info:Definition:Complex formed in muscle cells between the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum and invaginations of the plasma membrane (T-tubules).
0030386	name:Name:ferredoxin:thioredoxin reductase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses ferredoxin:thioredoxin reductase activity.
0030689	name:Name:Noc complex	info:Definition:Any of several heterodimers containing one or two Noc proteins, associated with preribosomal complexes; involved in ribosome biogenesis.
0030690	name:Name:Noc1p-Noc2p complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer associated with 90S and 66S preribosomes in the nucleolus; involved in ribosomal large subunit biogenesis.
0030691	name:Name:Noc2p-Noc3p complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer associated with 66S preribosomes; also found throughout the nucleoplasm; involved in ribosomal large subunit biogenesis.
0030692	name:Name:Noc4p-Nop14p complex	name:Synonym:Nop7 complex	name:Synonym:Nop7 subcomplex	info:Definition:A heterodimer associated with precursors of the eukaryotic small ribosomal subunit, including the 90S preribosome; involved in small subunit biogenesis.
0030700	name:Name:glycine reductase complex	info:Definition:Complex that possesses glycine reductase activity; usually comprises three subunits, of which two are selenoproteins; the subunits are typically designated selenoprotein A, selenoprotein B and protein C.
0030870	name:Name:Mre11 complex	name:Synonym:MRN complex	name:Synonym:MRX complex	name:Synonym:Rad50 complex	name:Synonym:RAD50-MRE11-NBN complex	name:Synonym:Rad50-Rad32-Nbs1 complex	name:Synonym:RMX complex	info:Definition:Trimeric protein complex that possesses endonuclease activity; involved in meiotic recombination, DNA repair and checkpoint signaling. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the complex comprises Mre11p, Rad50p, and Xrs2p; complexes identified in other species generally contain proteins orthologous to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins.
0030877	name:Name:beta-catenin destruction complex	name:Synonym:beta-catenin degradation complex	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic protein complex containing glycogen synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK-3-beta), the adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC), and the scaffolding protein axin, among others; phosphorylates beta-catenin, targets it for degradation by the proteasome.
0030880	name:Name:RNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:multisubunit RNA polymerase	info:Definition:Any complex that possesses RNA polymerase activity; generally comprises a catalytic subunit and one or more additional subunits.
0000428	name:Name:DNA-directed RNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses DNA-directed RNA polymerase activity.
0031379	name:Name:RNA-directed RNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses RNA-directed RNA polymerase activity.
0030895	name:Name:apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme complex	name:Synonym:apoB mRNA editing enzyme complex	name:Synonym:APOBEC	info:Definition:Protein complex that mediates editing of the mRNA encoding apolipoprotein B; catalyzes the deamination of C to U (residue 6666 in the human mRNA). Contains a catalytic subunit, APOBEC-1, and other proteins (e.g. human ASP; rat ASP and KSRP).
0030896	name:Name:checkpoint clamp complex	name:Synonym:CCC	name:Synonym:Rad9-Hus1-Rad1 (9-1-1) clamp complex	info:Definition:Conserved heterotrimeric complex of PCNA-like proteins that is loaded onto DNA at sites of DNA damage.
0030897	name:Name:HOPS complex	info:Definition:A multimeric protein complex that associates with the vacuolar membrane and is involved in homotypic vacuole fusion and vacuole protein sorting. For example, the Saccharomyces complex contains Vps41p, Vam6p, Pep5p, Vps16p, Pep3p, and Vps33p.
0030904	name:Name:retromer complex	info:Definition:A conserved multimeric membrane-associated complex involved in retrograde transport from endosomes to the Golgi apparatus. For example, the budding yeast retromer comprises Vps35p, Vps29p, Vps26p, Vps5p, and Vps17p.
0030905	name:Name:retromer complex, outer shell	info:Definition:One of two subcomplexes that combine to form the retromer, believed to be peripherally associated with the membrane. The budding yeast complex comprises Vps5p and Vps17p, and may contain multiple copies of a Vps5p/Vps17p dimer.
0030906	name:Name:retromer complex, inner shell	info:Definition:One of two subcomplexes that combine to form the retromer, believed to be closely associated with the membrane. In budding yeast the complex comprises Vps35p, Vps29p, and Vps26p.
0030915	name:Name:Smc5-Smc6 complex	info:Definition:A conserved complex that contains a heterodimer of SMC proteins (Smc5p and Smc6p, or homologs thereof) and several other proteins, and is involved in DNA repair and maintaining cell cycle arrest following DNA damage. In S. cerevisiae, this is an octameric complex called Mms21-Smc5-Smc6 complex, with at least five of its subunits conserved in fission yeast and humans.
0030929	name:Name:ADPG pyrophosphorylase complex	info:Definition:Complex that possesses ADPG pyrophosphorylase activity. In all organisms where it has been found, the complex is a tetramer. In bacteria, it is a homotetramer. In plants, the complex is a heterotetramer composed small and large subunits.
0030930	name:Name:homotetrameric ADPG pyrophosphorylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of four identical subunits that possesses ADPG pyrophosphorylase activity. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0030931	name:Name:heterotetrameric ADPG pyrophosphorylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of four different subunits that possesses ADPG pyrophosphorylase activity. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0030956	name:Name:glutamyl-tRNA(Gln) amidotransferase complex	name:Synonym:AdT	name:Synonym:GatCAB	name:Synonym:GatFAB	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses glutamyl-tRNA(Gln) amidotransferase activity, and therefore creates Gln-tRNA by amidating Glu-tRNA; usually composed of 3 subunits: A, B, and C. Note that the C subunit may not be required in all organisms.
0030964	name:Name:NADH dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:Complex I	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase complex (plastoquinone)	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase complex (quinone)	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase complex (ubiquinone)	name:Synonym:NADH:plastoquinone reductase complex	name:Synonym:plastid NADH dehydrogenase complex (plastoquinone)	info:Definition:An integral membrane complex that possesses NADH oxidoreductase activity. The complex is one of the components of the electron transport chain. It catalyzes the transfer of a pair of electrons from NADH to a quinone.
0045271	name:Name:respiratory chain complex I	name:Synonym:electron transport complex I	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase complex (ubiquinone)	name:Synonym:NADH-Q oxidoreductase complex	info:Definition:Respiratory chain complex I is an enzyme of the respiratory chain. It consists of at least 34 polypeptide chains and is L-shaped, with a horizontal arm lying in the membrane and a vertical arm that projects into the matrix. The electrons of NADH enter the chain at this complex.
0071685	name:Name:NADH dehydrogenase complex (plastoquinone)	info:Definition:An NADH dehydrogenase complex that catalyzes the transfer of electrons to plastoquinone. The complex is involved in the non-photochemical reduction of plastoquinones and the cyclic electron transport around photosystem I, and is found in plastid thylakoids.
0030990	name:Name:intraflagellar transport particle	info:Definition:A nonmembrane-bound oligomeric protein complex that participates in bidirectional transport of molecules (cargo) along axonemal microtubules.
0030991	name:Name:intraflagellar transport particle A	info:Definition:The smaller subcomplex of the intraflagellar transport particle; characterized complexes have molecular weights of 710-760 kDa.
0030992	name:Name:intraflagellar transport particle B	info:Definition:The larger subcomplex of the intraflagellar transport particle; characterized complexes have molecular weights around 550 kDa.
0030993	name:Name:axonemal heterotrimeric kinesin-II complex	info:Definition:A kinesin complex found in eukaryotic axonemes that contains two distinct plus end-directed kinesin motor proteins and at least one accessory subunit, and that functions in the anterograde transport of molecules (cargo) from the basal body to the distal tip of the axoneme.
0031004	name:Name:potassium ion-transporting ATPase complex	name:Synonym:Kdp system complex	info:Definition:Protein complex that carries out the reaction: ATP + H2O + K+(out) = ADP + phosphate + K+(in). It is a high affinity potassium uptake system. The E. coli complex consists of 4 proteins: KdpA is the potassium ion translocase, KdpB is the ATPase, and KdpC and KdpF seem to be involved in assembly and stabilization of the complex.
0031015	name:Name:karyopherin docking complex	name:Synonym:Asm4p-containing complex	name:Synonym:nuclear pore subcomplex	info:Definition:A subcomplex of the nuclear pore complex that interacts with karyopherin-cargo complexes; a well-characterized example in Saccharomyces contains Asm4p, Nup53p, and Nup170p.
0031026	name:Name:glutamate synthase complex	info:Definition:A complex that possesses glutamate synthase activity.
0009342	name:Name:glutamate synthase complex (NADPH)	info:Definition:A complex that possesses glutamate synthase (NADPH) activity.
0031027	name:Name:glutamate synthase complex (NADH)	info:Definition:A protein complex that in yeast consists of a large and a small subunit. Possesses glutamate synthase (NADH) activity.
0031074	name:Name:nucleocytoplasmic shuttling complex	info:Definition:Any complex that acts to move proteins or RNAs into or out of the nucleus through nuclear pores.
0042563	name:Name:importin alpha-subunit nuclear export complex	info:Definition:A protein complex which usually consists of three components, e.g. in Xenopus, the importin alpha-subunit/CAS/Ran, and which functions to shuttle the importin alpha-subunit out of the nucleus through the nuclear pore.
0042564	name:Name:NLS-dependent protein nuclear import complex	info:Definition:A protein complex which usually consists of three components, e.g. in Xenopus, the importin alpha and beta-subunits and any protein which has a nuclear localization sequence (NLS). The complex acts to import proteins with an NLS into the nucleus through a nuclear pore.
0042565	name:Name:RNA nuclear export complex	info:Definition:A complex which usually consists of three components, e.g. in Xenopus and yeast, the export receptor CRM1 (also known as exportin 1), the Ran protein and any RNA with a nuclear export sequence (NES). The complex acts to export RNA molecules with a NES from the nucleus through a nuclear pore.
0031080	name:Name:Nup107-160 complex	name:Synonym:Nup107-120 complex	name:Synonym:Nup84 complex	info:Definition:A subcomplex of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) involved in mRNA export and NPC assembly. Contains conserved nucleoporins and other proteins; for example, the Saccharomyces complex contains Nup84p, Nup85p, Nup120p, Nup145p-C, Seh1p, Sec13p, and Nup133p.
0031082	name:Name:BLOC complex	info:Definition:Any of several protein complexes required for the biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal-lysosomal system, such as melanosomes, platelet dense granules, and other related organelles; acronym for biogenesis of lysosomal-related organelles complex.
0031083	name:Name:BLOC-1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal-lysosomal system, such as melanosomes and platelet dense granules. Many of the protein subunits are conserved between mouse and human; the mouse complex contains the Pallidin, Muted, Cappuccino, Dysbindin, Snapin, BLOS1, BLOS2, AND BLOS3 proteins.
0031084	name:Name:BLOC-2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal-lysosomal system, such as melanosomes and platelet dense granules. The human complex contains the Hps3, Hps5, and Hps6 proteins; the mouse complex contains ru2 and ru.
0031085	name:Name:BLOC-3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal-lysosomal system, such as melanosomes and platelet dense granules. The human complex contains the Hps1 and Hps4 proteins.
0031105	name:Name:septin complex	info:Definition:Any of several heterooligomeric complexes containing multiple septins.
0032151	name:Name:mitotic septin complex	info:Definition:A heterooligomeric septin complex that acts during mitotic cell division.
0032152	name:Name:meiotic septin complex	info:Definition:A heterooligomeric septin complex that acts during meiotic cell division.
0031201	name:Name:SNARE complex	info:Definition:A protein complex involved in membrane fusion; a stable ternary complex consisting of a four-helix bundle, usually formed from one R-SNARE and three Q-SNAREs with an ionic layer sandwiched between hydrophobic layers. One well-characterized example is the neuronal SNARE complex formed of synaptobrevin 2, syntaxin 1a, and SNAP-25.
0070032	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a-complexin I complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Vamp2, Snap25, Stx1a, Cplx1)	name:Synonym:Vamp2-Snap25-Stx1a-Cplx1 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 1a, and complexin I (or orthologs thereof).
0070033	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a-complexin II complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Vamp2, Snap25, Stx1a, Cplx2)	name:Synonym:Vamp2-Snap25-Stx1a-Cplx2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 1a, and complexin II (or orthologs thereof).
0070044	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a complex	name:Synonym:Snap25-Stx1a-Vamp2 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Snap25, Stx1a, Vamp2)	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx1a, SNAP25, VAMP)	name:Synonym:Stx1a-SNAP25-VAMP complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 1a (or orthologs thereof).
0070045	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-2 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx2, Snap25, Vamp2)	name:Synonym:Stx2-Snap25-Vamp2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 2 (or orthologs thereof).
0070046	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-3 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx3, Snap25, Vamp2)	name:Synonym:Stx3-Snap25-Vamp2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 3 (or orthologs thereof).
0070047	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-4 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx4, Snap25, Vamp2)	name:Synonym:Stx4-Snap25-Vamp2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 4 (or orthologs thereof).
0070048	name:Name:endobrevin-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx1a, Snap25, Vamp8)	name:Synonym:Stx1a-Snap25-Vamp8 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains endobrevin (VAMP8), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 1a (or orthologs thereof).
0070049	name:Name:endobrevin-SNAP-25-syntaxin-2 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx2, Snap25, Vamp8)	name:Synonym:Stx2-Snap25-Vamp8 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains endobrevin (VAMP8), SNAP-25, and syntaxin 2 (or orthologs thereof).
0070065	name:Name:cellubrevin-VAMP4-syntaxin-16 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Vamp3, Vamp4, Stx16)	name:Synonym:Vamp3-Vamp4-Stx16 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains cellubrevin (VAMP3), VAMP4, and syntaxin 16 (or orthologs thereof).
0070066	name:Name:cellubrevin-VAMP4-endobrevin-syntaxin-6 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Vamp3, Vamp4, Vam8, Stx6)	name:Synonym:Vamp3-Vamp4-Vam8-Stx6 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains cellubrevin (VAMP3), VAMP4, endobrevin (VAMP8), and syntaxin 6 (or orthologs thereof).
0070067	name:Name:syntaxin-6-syntaxin-16-Vti1a complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains syntaxin 6, syntaxin 16, and Vti1a (or orthologs thereof).
0070068	name:Name:VAMP4-syntaxin-6-syntaxin-16-Vti1a complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Vamp4, Stx6, Stx16, Vti1a)	name:Synonym:Vamp4-Stx6-Stx16-Vti1a complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains VAMP4, syntaxin 6, syntaxin 16, and Vti1a (or orthologs thereof).
0070355	name:Name:synaptotagmin-synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a-syntaxin-1b-Rab3a-complexin II complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (STX1a, STX1b, SNAP25, RAB3a, SYT1, VAMP2, CPLX2)	name:Synonym:STX1a-STX1b-SNAP25-RAB3a-SYT1-VAMP2-CPLX2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptotagmin, synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 1a, syntaxin1b, Rab3a, and complexin II (or orthologs thereof).
0070356	name:Name:synaptotagmin-synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a-syntaxin-1b-Rab3a complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (STX1a, STX1b, SNAP25, RAB3a, SYT1, VAMP2)	name:Synonym:STX1a-STX1b-SNAP25-RAB3a-SYT1-VAMP2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptotagmin, synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 1a, syntaxin1b, and Rab3a (or orthologs thereof).
0070554	name:Name:synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-3-complexin complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx3, Snap25, Vamp2, Cplx1)	name:Synonym:Stx3-Snap25-Vamp2-Cplx1 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 3, and a complexin (or orthologs thereof).
0070766	name:Name:endobrevin-synaptobrevin 2-alpha-SNAP-NSF-syntaxin-4 complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Stx4, Napa, Vamp3, Nsf, Vamp2)	name:Synonym:Stx4-Napa-Vamp3-Nsf-Vamp2 complex	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains endobrevin (VAMP8), synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), alpha-SNAP, NSF, and syntaxin 4 (or orthologs thereof).
0070768	name:Name:synaptotagmin-synaptobrevin 2-SNAP-25-syntaxin-1a-syntaxin-1b-Unc13 complex	name:Synonym:Snap25-Syt1-Unc13b-Vamp2-Stx1b2-Stx1a complex	name:Synonym:SNARE complex (Snap25, Syt1, Unc13b, Vamp2, Stx1b2, Stx1a)	info:Definition:A SNARE complex that contains synaptotagmin, synaptobrevin 2 (VAMP2), SNAP-25, syntaxin 1a, syntaxin1b, and Unc13b (or orthologs thereof).
0031205	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum Sec complex	info:Definition:An endoplasmic reticulum membrane-associated complex involved in the translocation of proteins that are targeted to the ER. In yeast, this complex consists of two subcomplexes, namely, the Sec61 complex and the Sec62/Sec63 complex.
0031207	name:Name:Sec62/Sec63 complex	name:Synonym:ER protein translocation subcomplex 	name:Synonym:Sec62/63 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex involved in the posttranslational targeting of proteins to the ER. In yeast, it is a tetrameric complex consisting of Sec62p, Sec63p, Sec71p and Sec72p.
0031209	name:Name:SCAR complex	name:Synonym:WAVE complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric complex that includes orthologues of human PIR121, Nap125 and HSPC300 and regulates actin polymerization and/or depolymerization through small GTPase mediated signal transduction.
0031248	name:Name:protein acetyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A complex that catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group to a protein acceptor molecule.
0009323	name:Name:ribosomal-protein-alanine N-acetyltransferase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex that catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group to ribosomal-protein alanine, forming ribosomal-protein acetylalanine.
0031414	name:Name:N-terminal protein acetyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:NAT complex	info:Definition:A complex that catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group to the N-terminal residue of a protein acceptor molecule.
0031250	name:Name:anaerobic ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex composed of 4 subunits, 2 copies of the large protein (nrdD in E. coli) and 2 copies of the small protein (nrdG in E. coli). It catalyzes the generation of 2'deoxyribonucleotides under anaerobic growth conditions. The larger subunit is the catalytic unit that is activated by the smaller iron-binding subunit.
0031251	name:Name:PAN complex	name:Synonym:poly(A) nuclease complex	info:Definition:A complex that possesses poly(A)-specific ribonuclease activity; catalyzes the message-specific shortening of mRNA poly(A) tails. Contains at least two subunits, known as Pan2p and Pan3p in Saccharomyces.
0031262	name:Name:Ndc80 complex	name:Synonym:Nuf2-Ndc80 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex conserved among eukaryotes that forms part of the kinetochore and plays an essential role in forming stable kinetochore-microtubule attachments. The complex contains proteins known in several species, including budding and fission yeasts, as Ndc80p, Nuf2p, Spc24p, and Spc25p. In vertebrates it is part of the outer plate of the kinetochore.
0031264	name:Name:death-inducing signaling complex	name:Synonym:death-inducing signalling complex	name:Synonym:DISC	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of signaling proteins with a death receptor upon ligand binding. The complex includes procaspases and death domain-containing proteins in addition to the ligand-bound receptor.
0031265	name:Name:CD95 death-inducing signaling complex	name:Synonym:CD95 death-inducing signalling complex	name:Synonym:CD95 DISC	name:Synonym:Fas death-inducing signaling complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed upon binding of Fas/CD95/APO-1 to its ligand. The complex includes FADD/Mort1, procaspase-8/10 and c-FLIP in addition to the ligand-bound receptor.
0031266	name:Name:TRAIL death-inducing signaling complex	name:Synonym:TRAIL death-inducing signalling complex	name:Synonym:TRAIL DISC	info:Definition:A protein complex formed upon binding of TRAIL to its ligand. The complex includes FADD/Mort1 and procaspase-8 addition to the ligand-bound receptor.
0031298	name:Name:replication fork protection complex	name:Synonym:replisome progression complex	name:Synonym:Swi1-Swi3 complex	name:Synonym:TIMELESS-TIPIN complex	info:Definition:A protein complex conserved in eukaryotes and associated with the replication fork; the complex stabilizes stalled replication forks and is thought to be involved in coordinating leading- and lagging-strand synthesis and in replication checkpoint signaling.
0031317	name:Name:tripartite ATP-independent periplasmic transporter complex	name:Synonym:TRAP transporter complex	name:Synonym:TRAP-T transporter complex	info:Definition:A complex consisting of two membrane proteins and one extracytoplasmic solute receptor. Such transporters transport a variety of substrates without direct ATP power, instead using energy from ion gradients.
0031371	name:Name:ubiquitin conjugating enzyme complex	name:Synonym:E2 complex	info:Definition:Any complex that possesses ubiquitin conjugating enzyme activity.
0031372	name:Name:UBC13-MMS2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric ubiquitin conjugating enzyme complex that catalyzes assembly of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains, which act as a signal to promote error-free DNA postreplication repair; in Saccharomyces the complex comprises Ubc13p and Mms2p.
0035370	name:Name:UBC13-UEV1A complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric ubiquitin conjugating enzyme complex that catalyzes assembly of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains and is involved in NF-kappaB activation. In humans at least, the complex comprises the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme variant 1A (UEV1A).
0031389	name:Name:Rad17 RFC-like complex	name:Synonym:Rad17-RFC	name:Synonym:Rad17-RLC	name:Synonym:Rad24p RFC-like complex	name:Synonym:RFC (Rad17)	info:Definition:A pentameric protein complex related to replication factor C, which loads a trimeric complex of checkpoint proteins (known as the checkpoint clamp or 9-1-1 complex) onto DNA at damage sites; functions in DNA damage cell cycle checkpoints. In Schizosaccharomyces pombe the subunits are known as Rad17, Rfc2, Rfc3, Rfc4, and Rfc5, while in Saccharomyces cerevisiae the subunits are known as Rad24p, Rfc2p, Rfc3p, Rfc4p, and Rfc5p.
0031390	name:Name:Ctf18 RFC-like complex	name:Synonym:Ctf18-RFC	name:Synonym:Ctf18-RLC	name:Synonym:RFC (Ctf18)	info:Definition:A heptameric complex related to replication factor C, which loads the DNA polymerase processivity factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA and plays a vital role in chromosome cohesion. In Saccharomyces the subunits are known as Ctf18p, Rfc2p, Rfc3p, Rfc4p, Rfc5p, Dcc1p, and Ctf8p.
0031391	name:Name:Elg1 RFC-like complex	name:Synonym:Elg1-RFC	name:Synonym:Elg1-RLC	name:Synonym:RFC (Elg1)	info:Definition:A pentameric complex related to replication factor C, which loads the DNA polymerase processivity factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA and has roles in telomere length regulation and other aspects of genome stability. In Saccharomyces the subunits are known as Elg1p, Rfc2p, Rfc3p, Rfc4p, and Rfc5p.
0031395	name:Name:bursicon neuropeptide hormone complex	info:Definition:A neuropeptide hormone secreted by the central nervous system of insects that stimulates the tanning and sclerotization of the adult cuticle following eclosion. The active hormone consists of an obligate heterodimer of the alpha and beta subunits.
0031422	name:Name:RecQ helicase-Topo III complex	name:Synonym:Sgs1-Top3 complex	info:Definition:A complex containing a RecQ family helicase and a topoisomerase III homologue; may also include one or more additional proteins; conserved from E. coli to human.
0031431	name:Name:Dbf4-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:Cdc7-Dbf4 complex	name:Synonym:DDK	name:Synonym:Hsk1-Dfp1 kinase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex required for the activation of DNA replication origins; comprises a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit (in Saccharomyces, Cdc7p and Dbf4p, respectively); complexes identified in other species generally contain proteins related to the Saccharomyces proteins.
0031499	name:Name:TRAMP complex	name:Synonym:TRAMP4 complex	name:Synonym:TRAMP5 complex	name:Synonym:Trf4 complex	name:Synonym:Trf4 poly(A) polymerase complex	name:Synonym:Trf4p-Air2p-Mtr4p polyadenylation complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex having distributive polyadenylation activity of a variety of RNA substrates including hypomodified and incorrectly folded tRNAs, pre-snRNAs, pre-snoRNAs, incorrectly spliced or processed pre-mRNAs, cryptic unstable transcripts (CUTs), pre-rRNAs and rRNA fragments released as part of rRNA processing. In S. cerevisiae, the complex consists of either Pap2 (also known as Trf4) or Trf5, Air1 or Air2, and Mtr4, and is involved in RNA 3'-end processing and in RNA surveillance and quality control.
0031501	name:Name:mannosyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A complex that posseses mannosyltransferase activity.
0000136	name:Name:alpha-1,6-mannosyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A large, multiprotein complex with alpha-1,6 mannosyltransferase activity, located in the cis Golgi membrane; adds mannan to N-linked glycans on proteins.
0031502	name:Name:dolichyl-phosphate-mannose-protein mannosyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:PMT family mannosyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:protein O-mannosyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A complex that possesses dolichyl-phosphate-mannose-protein mannosyltransferase activity; usually includes members of the PMT1 and PMT2 protein subfamilies.
0033185	name:Name:dolichol-phosphate-mannose synthase complex	name:Synonym:dolichyl-phosphate beta-D-mannosyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:DPM synthase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses dolichyl-phosphate beta-D-mannosyltransferase activity; contains a catalytic subunit, a regulatory subunit, and a third subunit that stabilizes the complex. In human and several other metazoa, the subunits are named DPM1, DPM2 and DPM3, respectively.
0031510	name:Name:SUMO activating enzyme complex	name:Synonym:SAE	name:Synonym:SUMO E1 activator enzyme complex	info:Definition:A conserved heterodimeric complex with SUMO activating enzyme activity.
0031511	name:Name:Mis6-Sim4 complex	name:Synonym:Mis6 centromere subcomplex	name:Synonym:Mis6-Mal2-Sim4 centromere complex	name:Synonym:Sim4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of the inner centromere, which is involved in the loading of the centromeric histone h3 variant CENP-A onto centromeres and in centromere specific heterochromatin formation. The complex contains about 12 proteins, of which two are known as Mis6 and Sim4 in S. pombe and CENP-I and CENP-H in human.
0031518	name:Name:CBF3 complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex that binds to centromeric DNA and initiates kinetochore assembly. In yeast, this complex consists of four subunits, namely Ctf13p, Skp1p, Cep3p and Cbf2p.
0031519	name:Name:PcG protein complex	name:Synonym:Polycomb Group protein complex	info:Definition:A chromatin-associated multiprotein complex containing Polycomb Group proteins. In Drosophila, Polycomb group proteins are involved in the long-term maintenance of gene repression, and PcG protein complexes associate with Polycomb group response elements (PREs) in target genes to regulate higher-order chromatin structure.
0035098	name:Name:ESC/E(Z) complex	name:Synonym:Extra Sex Combs/Enhancer of Zeste complex	name:Synonym:PRC2 complex	info:Definition:A multimeric protein complex that can methylate lysine-27 and lysine-9 residues of histone H3. In Drosophila the core subunits of the complex include ESC, E(Z), CAF1 (NURF-55) and SU(Z)12. In mammals the core subunits of the complex include EED, EZH2, SUZ12 and RBBP4.
0035102	name:Name:PRC1 complex	name:Synonym:Polycomb repressive complex 1	info:Definition:An insect multiprotein complex containing the products of many of the Polycomb Group genes including Polycomb, Posterior sex combs, polyhomeotic and Sex comb on midleg. The Polycomb Group proteins are required for stable long-term maintenance of transcriptionally repressed states and the PRC1 complex directly antagonizes ATP-dependent remodeling of nucleosomal arrays.
0035517	name:Name:PR-DUB complex	name:Synonym:Polycomb repressive deubiquitinase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric protein complex that removes monoubiquitin from histone H2A. In Drosophila and mammals, the core of the complex is composed of Calypso/BAP1 and Asx/ASXL1, respectively.
0031521	name:Name:spitzenkorper	info:Definition:Structure within the hyphal tip of filamentous fungi that acts as an organizing center for hyphal tip growth; may function to supply vesicles to the elongating tip and/or to organize cytoskeletal microfilaments.
0031522	name:Name:cell envelope Sec protein transport complex	name:Synonym:plasma membrane Sec complex	name:Synonym:Sec complex	name:Synonym:Sec secretion complex	name:Synonym:Sec translocation complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex involved in the translocation of proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane. In Gram-negative bacteria, Sec-translocated proteins are subsequently secreted via the type II, IV, or V secretion systems. Sec complex components include SecA, D, E, F, G, Y and YajC.
0031523	name:Name:Myb complex	name:Synonym:Myeloblastosis proto-oncogene protein complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex consisting of Myb and other proteins that regulates site specific DNA replication, gene amplification and transcriptional repression.
0031588	name:Name:AMP-activated protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:5'-AMP-activated protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:Snf1 kinase complex	name:Synonym:Snf1 serine/threonine protein kinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses AMP-dependent protein kinase activity.
0031617	name:Name:NMS complex	name:Synonym:Ndc80-MIND-Spc7 complex	info:Definition:A supercomplex formed by the association of two subcomplexes (known as MIND and Ndc80 in Schizosaccharomyces) with additional proteins at the kinetochores of condensed nuclear chromosomes.
0031680	name:Name:G-protein beta/gamma-subunit complex	name:Synonym:G-beta/G-gamma complex	name:Synonym:heterotrimeric G-protein GTPase, beta-subunit	info:Definition:The heterodimer formed by the beta and gamma subunits of a heterotrimeric G protein, which dissociates from the alpha subunit upon guanine nuclotide exchange.
0031838	name:Name:haptoglobin-hemoglobin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the stable binding of a haptoglobin to hemoglobin.
0031897	name:Name:Tic complex	name:Synonym:chloroplast inner membrane translocase complex	info:Definition:The translocon of the inner envelope of chloroplasts, which facilitates the import of proteins across the chloroplast inner membrane.
0031913	name:Name:contractile vacuole pore	info:Definition:Stable structure that regulates the flow of liquid between the contractile vacuole and the surrounding medium.
0031931	name:Name:TORC1 complex	name:Synonym:nutrient sensitive complex	name:Synonym:TOR complex 1	name:Synonym:TORC 1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the TOR (target of rapamycin) serine/threonine kinase and mediates temporal control of cell growth via regulation of translation, transcription, ribosome biogenesis, nutrient transport, and autophagy. In Saccharomyces, the complex contains Kog1p, Lst8p, Tco89p, and either Tor1p or Tor2p; in mammals the complex contains orthologs of the yeast proteins.
0031932	name:Name:TORC2 complex	name:Synonym:TOR complex 2	name:Synonym:TORC 2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the TOR (target of rapamycin) serine/threonine kinase and mediates spatial control of cell growth via regulation of actin cytoskeleton polarization. In Saccharomyces, the complex contains Avo1p, Avo2p, Tsc11p, Lst8p, Bit61p, Slm1p, Slm2p, and Tor2p; in mammals the complex contains orthologs of the yeast proteins.
0031941	name:Name:filamentous actin	name:Synonym:F-actin	info:Definition:A two-stranded helical polymer of the protein actin.
0031942	name:Name:i-AAA complex	info:Definition:Protease complex of the mitochondrial inner membrane whose catalytic residues lie on the intermembrane space side of the inner membrane; involved in mitochondrial protein turnover. Contains a subunit belonging to the AAA family of ATP-dependent metalloproteases.
0032039	name:Name:integrator complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that stably associates with the C-terminus of RNA polymerase II and mediates 3'-end processing of small nuclear RNAs generated by RNA polymerase II.
0032045	name:Name:guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that stimulates the exchange of guanyl nucleotides associated with a GTPase.
0032068	name:Name:Type IV site-specific deoxyribonuclease complex	name:Synonym:Type IV restriction enzyme complex	info:Definition:A complex consisting of two proteins which acts as an endonuclease in DNA sequences containing a specific modified recognition site. Modifications may include methylation, hydroxymethylation, and glucosyl-hydroxymethylation.
0032116	name:Name:SMC loading complex	name:Synonym:chromatin loading complex	name:Synonym:cohesin loading complex	name:Synonym:SCC2/SCC4 loading complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the loading of a structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) complex, such as cohesin, condensin or SMC5/SMC6, onto DNA. Appears to be eukaryotically conserved.
0032126	name:Name:eisosome	info:Definition:Any of the large immobile protein assemblies at the plasma membrane that mark endocytic sites. In yeast, S. cerevisiae, these structures are primarily composed of Pil1p and Lsp1p.
0032144	name:Name:4-aminobutyrate transaminase complex	name:Synonym:ABAT complex	name:Synonym:GABA transaminase complex	name:Synonym:GABA-T complex	info:Definition:A homodimeric protein complex that possesses 4-aminobutyrate transaminase activity.
0032299	name:Name:ribonuclease H2 complex	name:Synonym:RNase H2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses ribonuclease H activity, in which the catalytic subunit is a member of the RNase H2 (or HII) class. For example, in Saccharomyces the complex contains Rnh201p, Rnh202p and Rnh203p.
0032300	name:Name:mismatch repair complex	info:Definition:Any complex formed of proteins that act in mismatch repair.
0032301	name:Name:MutSalpha complex	name:Synonym:MMR complex	name:Synonym:MSH2/MSH6 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer involved in the recognition and repair of base-base and small insertion/deletion mismatches. In human the complex consists of two subunits, MSH2 and MSH6.
0032302	name:Name:MutSbeta complex	name:Synonym:MMR complex	name:Synonym:MSH2/MSH3 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer involved in binding to and correcting insertion/deletion mutations. In human the complex consists of two subunits, MSH2 and MSH3.
0032389	name:Name:MutLalpha complex	name:Synonym:MLH1/PMS2 complex	name:Synonym:MMR complex	name:Synonym:MutL-alpha complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer involved in the recognition of base-base and small insertion/deletion mismatches. In human the complex consists of two subunits, MLH1 and PMS2.
0032390	name:Name:MutLbeta complex	name:Synonym:MLH1/PMS1 complex	name:Synonym:MMR complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer involved in the recognition of base-base and small insertion/deletion mismatches. In human the complex consists of two subunits, MLH1 and PMS1.
0032311	name:Name:angiogenin-PRI complex	name:Synonym:angiogenin-placental ribonuclease inhibitor complex	info:Definition:A stable heterodimer of angiogenin and placental ribonuclease inhibitor; interaction between angiogenin and PRI prevents angiogenin binding to its receptor to stimulate angiogenesis.
0032449	name:Name:CBM complex	name:Synonym:CARMA1-BCL10-Malt1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex comprising Carma1, Bcl10 and MALT1; plays a role in signal transduction during NF-kappaB activation.
0032476	name:Name:decaprenyl diphosphate synthase complex	info:Definition:A complex that possesses di-trans,poly-cis-decaprenylcistransferase activity; involved in ubiquinone biosynthesis.
0032477	name:Name:homodimeric decaprenyl diphosphate synthase complex	info:Definition:A homodimeric complex that possesses di-trans,poly-cis-decaprenylcistransferase activity; involved in ubiquinone biosynthesis.
0032478	name:Name:heterotetrameric decaprenyl diphosphate synthase complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that possesses di-trans,poly-cis-decaprenylcistransferase activity; involved in ubiquinone biosynthesis. In S. pombe it is a heterotetramer of Dlp1 and Dps1.
0032517	name:Name:SOD1-calcineurin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) with calcineurin; complex formation is implicated in activation of calcineurin by SOD1.
0032545	name:Name:CURI complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in the transcription of ribosomal genes. In Saccharomyces this complex consists of Ckb2p, Utp22p, Rrp7p andIfh1p.
0032766	name:Name:NHE3/E3KARP/ACTN4 complex	name:Synonym:NHE3/E3KARP/alpha-actinin complex	info:Definition:A heterotrimeric protein complex formed by the association of NHE3, E3KARP and alpha-actinin upon an increase in calcium ion concentration; found in clusters localized on plasma membrane and in intracellular compartments.
0032797	name:Name:SMN complex	name:Synonym:SMN core complex	name:Synonym:survival motor neuron complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein and at least eight additional integral components, including the Gemin2-8 and Unrip proteins; the complex is found in the cytoplasm and in nuclear Gems, and is involved in spliceosomal snRNP assembly in the cytoplasm and in pre-mRNA splicing in the nucleus.
0032806	name:Name:carboxy-terminal domain protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:CTDK complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that phosphorylates amino acid residues of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain repeats; phosphorylation occurs mainly on Ser2 and Ser5.
0000439	name:Name:core TFIIH complex	info:Definition:The 5 subunit core of TFIIH that has tightly associated subunits and is found in both the general transcription factor holo-TFIIH and in the nucleotide-excision repair factor 3 complex. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rad3, Tfb1, Tfb2, Ssl1, Tfb4. In humans, it is composed of XPD, p62, p55, p44, p34.
0032807	name:Name:DNA ligase IV complex	name:Synonym:DNA ligase IV-XRCC4 complex	info:Definition:A eukaryotically conserved protein complex that contains DNA ligase IV and is involved in DNA repair by non-homologous end joining; in addition to the ligase, the complex also contains XRCC4 or a homolog, e.g. Saccharomyces Lif1p.
0032865	name:Name:ERMES complex	name:Synonym:ER-mitochondria encounter structure	name:Synonym:Mdm10/Mdm12/Mmm1 complex	name:Synonym:mitochore	name:Synonym:MMM1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that links the endoplasmic reticulum with mitochondria and may have a role in promoting exchange of calcium and phospholipids between the two organelles. The complex is also associated with actively replicating mitochondrial DNA nucleoids, and may further coordinate mitochondrial genome replication and membrane growth.
0032921	name:Name:sarcosine oxidase complex	info:Definition:A complex consisting of 4 protein subunits as a heterotetramer, that possesses sarcosine oxidase activity.
0032936	name:Name:SREBP-SCAP complex	name:Synonym:Sre1-Scp1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) and SREBP-cleavage-activating protein (SCAP) in the ER membrane; in the absence of sterols, the SREBP-SCAP complex is packaged into COPII vesicles and travels to the Golgi apparatus to be processed.
0032937	name:Name:SREBP-SCAP-Insig complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP), SREBP-cleavage-activating protein (SCAP), and an Insig protein (Insig-1 or Insig-2) the ER membrane.
0032969	name:Name:endosomal scaffold complex	name:Synonym:endosomal adaptor complex	name:Synonym:MP1-p14 scaffolding complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains MAPKSP1 (MP1, Map2k1ip1) and ROBLD3 (p14, Mapbpip), is anchored to late endosomes, and is involved in selective activation of the ERK1 in ERK/MAPK signaling.
0032996	name:Name:Bcl3-Bcl10 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex containing Bcl3 and Bcl10, which forms when Akt1 is activated by TNF-alpha to phosphorylate Bcl10; the Bcl3-Bcl10 complex is translocated to the nucleus.
0032997	name:Name:Fc receptor complex	name:Synonym:Fc-receptor complex	name:Synonym:FcR complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of a subunit or subunits capable of binding the Fc portion of an immunoglobulin with additional signaling components. The complex functions as a receptor for immunoglobulin.
0032998	name:Name:Fc-epsilon receptor I complex	name:Synonym:FceRI complex	name:Synonym:IgE receptor complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin E receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of an Fc-epsilon RI alpha chain and an Fc-epsilon RI gamma chain dimer with or without an Fc-episilon RI beta chain and additional signaling components. The complex functions primarily as an activating receptor for IgE.
0032999	name:Name:Fc-alpha receptor I complex	name:Synonym:FcaRI complex	name:Synonym:IgA receptor complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin A receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of an Fc-alpha R alpha chain and an Fc-epsilon RI gamma chain dimer with or without additional signaling components. The complex functions primarily as an activating receptor for IgA.
0033000	name:Name:Fc-gamma receptor I complex	name:Synonym:FcgRI complex	name:Synonym:IgG receptor complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin G receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of an Fc-gamma RI alpha chain and an Fc-epsilon RI gamma chain dimer with or without additional signaling components. The complex functions primarily as an activating receptor for IgG.
0033001	name:Name:Fc-gamma receptor III complex	name:Synonym:FcgRIII complex	name:Synonym:IgG receptor complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin G receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of an Fc-gamma RIII alpha chain and an Fc-epsilon RI gamma chain dimer with or without an Fc-epsilon RI beta chain and additional signaling components. The complex functions primarily as an activating receptor for IgG.
0033061	name:Name:DNA recombinase mediator complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that promotes nucleoprotein filament formation during homologous recombination; most known examples contain two or more RecA family proteins (often Rad51 paralogs).
0032798	name:Name:Swi5-Sfr1 complex	name:Synonym:Sae3-Mei5 complex	name:Synonym:Swi5 complex	info:Definition:A conserved DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains two Swi5 monomers and one Sfr1 monomer in Schizosaccharomyces, or orthologs thereof (e.g. Sae3p and Mei5p in Saccharomyces).
0033062	name:Name:Rhp55-Rhp57 complex	name:Synonym:Rad55-Rad57 complex	info:Definition:A conserved heterodimeric DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains the RecA family proteins Rhp55p and Rph57 in Schizosaccharomyces, or orthologs thereof (e.g. Rad55p and Rad57p in Saccharomyces).
0033063	name:Name:Rad51B-Rad51C-Rad51D-XRCC2 complex	name:Synonym:BCDX2 complex	info:Definition:A DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains the Rad51 paralogs RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, and XRCC2, or orthologs thereof.
0033064	name:Name:XRCC2-RAD51D complex	name:Synonym:DX2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains the Rad51 paralogs RAD51D and XRCC2, or orthologs thereof; conserved from fission yeast to human but absent from budding yeast.
0033065	name:Name:Rad51C-XRCC3 complex	name:Synonym:CX3 complex	info:Definition:A DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains the Rad51 paralogs RAD51C and XRCC3, or orthologs thereof.
0033066	name:Name:Rad51B-Rad51C complex	name:Synonym:BC complex	info:Definition:A DNA recombinase mediator complex that contains the Rad51 paralogs RAD51B and RAD51C, or orthologs thereof.
0033104	name:Name:type VI protein secretion system complex	name:Synonym:T6SS complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins that permits the transfer of proteins into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells via the type VI secretion system. Proteins secreted by this complex do not require an N-terminal signal sequence.
0033177	name:Name:proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex, proton-transporting domain	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of a proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex and carries out proton transport across a membrane. The proton-transporting domain (F0, V0, or A0) includes integral and peripheral membrane proteins.
0033179	name:Name:proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V0 domain	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase and mediates proton transport across a membrane. The V0 complex consists of at least four different subunits (a,c,d and e); six or more c subunits form a proton-binding rotor ring.
0045263	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(o)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(o)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, coupling factor CF(0)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, F0 sector	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(0)	info:Definition:All non-F1 subunits of a hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, including integral and peripheral membrane proteins.
0033178	name:Name:proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex, catalytic domain	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of a proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex and catalyzes ATP hydrolysis or synthesis. The catalytic domain (F1, V1, or A1) comprises a hexameric catalytic core and a central stalk, and is peripherally associated with the membrane when the two-sector ATPase is assembled.
0033180	name:Name:proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V1 domain	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase and catalyzes ATP hydrolysis. The V1 complex consists of: (1) a globular headpiece with three alternating copies of subunits A and B that form a ring, (2) a central rotational stalk composed of single copies of subunits D and F, and (3) a peripheral stalk made of subunits C, E, G and H. Subunits A and B mediate the hydrolysis of ATP at three reaction sites associated with subunit A.
0045261	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, catalytic core F(1)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, F1 sector	info:Definition:The sector of a hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase complex in which the catalytic activity resides; it comprises the catalytic core and central stalk, and is peripherally associated with a membrane, such as the plasma membrane or the mitochondrial inner membrane, when the entire ATP synthase is assembled.
0033193	name:Name:Lsd1/2 complex	name:Synonym:SAPHIRE complex	name:Synonym:Swm complex	name:Synonym:Swm1/2 complex	info:Definition:A nucleosome-binding protein complex that comprises two SWIRM domain histone demethylases and two PHD finger proteins. The complex is involved in transcriptional regulation via heterochromatic silencing and the regulation of chromatin boundary formation, and was first identified in fission yeast.
0033202	name:Name:DNA helicase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses DNA helicase activity.
0009379	name:Name:Holliday junction helicase complex	info:Definition:A DNA helicase complex that forms part of a Holliday junction resolvase complex, where the helicase activity is involved in the migration of the junction branch point. The best-characterized example is the E. coli RuvAB complex, in which a hexamer of RuvB subunits possesses helicase activity that is modulated by association with RuvA.
0017117	name:Name:single-stranded DNA-dependent ATP-dependent DNA helicase complex	name:Synonym:ssDNA-dependent ATP-dependent DNA helicase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses single-stranded DNA-dependent DNA helicase activity.
0033203	name:Name:DNA helicase A complex	info:Definition:A homohexameric protein complex that possesses DNA helicase activity; associates with DNA polymerase alpha-primase and translocates in the 5' to 3' direction.
0034980	name:Name:FHL2-CREB complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains CREB and FHL2, and is involved in transcriptional regulation.
0034981	name:Name:FHL3-CREB complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains CREB and FHL3, and is involved in transcriptional regulation.
0033254	name:Name:vacuolar transporter chaperone complex	name:Synonym:VTC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains four related proteins that have been implicated in several membrane-related processes, such as sorting of H+-translocating ATPases, endocytosis, ER-Golgi trafficking, vacuole fusion, vacuolar polyphosphate homeostasis and the microautophagic scission of vesicles into the vacuolar lumen. The complex is enriched at the vacuolar membrane, but also found in other cellular compartments, including the ER and the cell periphery. In Saccharomyces, the subunits are Vtc1p, Vtc2p, Vtc3p and Vtc4p.
0033256	name:Name:I-kappaB/NF-kappaB complex	info:Definition:A protein complex containing an I-kappaB protein and one or more copies of an NF-kappaB protein; mediates regulation of NF-kappaB activity by I-kappaB.
0033257	name:Name:Bcl3/NF-kappaB2 complex	name:Synonym:Bcl3-NFKB2 complex	name:Synonym:Bcl3-p52 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex containing one Bcl protein and one or more copies of NF-kappaB2; formation of complexes of different stoichiometry depends on the Bcl3:NF-kappaB2 ratio, and allow Bcl3 to exert different regulatory effects on NF-kappaB2-dependent transcription.
0033263	name:Name:CORVET complex	info:Definition:A multimeric protein complex that acts as an endosomal tethering complex (CORVET = class C core vacuole/endosome tethering) by cooperating with Rab GTPases to capture endosomal vesicles and trap them prior to the action of SNAREs; the complex is involved in endo-lysosomal biogenesis and required for transport between endosome and vacuole. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae complex contains Vps8p, Vps3p, Pep5p, Vps16p, Pep3p, and Vps33p.
0033281	name:Name:TAT protein transport complex	name:Synonym:TAT protein secretion complex	name:Synonym:TAT protein translocation system complex	name:Synonym:Twin-arginine translocation complex 	info:Definition:A complex of three proteins integral to the cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria and membranes of organelles derived from bacteria (chloroplasts and mitochondria) involved in membrane transport of folded proteins.
0033282	name:Name:protein C inhibitor-acrosin complex	name:Synonym:PCI-ACR complex	name:Synonym:PCI-acrosin complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex of protein C inhibitor and acrosin; complex formation inhibits the protease activity of acrosin.
0033551	name:Name:monopolin complex	name:Synonym:monopolin subcomplex Csm1/Lrs4	name:Synonym:Pcs1/Mde4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for clamping microtubule binding sites, ensuring orientation of sister kinetochores to the same pole (mono-orientation) during meiosis I. In the yeast S. cerevisiae this complex consists of Csm1p, Lrs4p, Hrr25p and Mam1p; in S. pombe Psc1 and Mde4 have been identified as subunits.
0033557	name:Name:Slx1-Slx4 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that possesses an endonuclease activity that specifically cleaves certain types of branched DNA structures; because such structures often form during the replication ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeats, the complex plays a role in the maintenance of rDNA. The subunits are known as Slx1 and Slx 4 in budding and fission yeasts, and are conserved in eukaryotes.
0033565	name:Name:ESCRT-0 complex	name:Synonym:Hrs/STAM complex	name:Synonym:Vps27p-Hse1p complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the recycling of Golgi proteins, formation of lumenal membranes and sorting of ubiquitinated proteins into those membranes. This complex includes Vps1p and Hse1p in yeast and the Hrs and STAM proteins in mammals.
0033573	name:Name:high affinity iron permease complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of a multicopper ferroxidase that oxidizes Fe(II) to Fe(III), and a ferric iron permease that transports the produced Fe(III) into the cell.
0033588	name:Name:Elongator holoenzyme complex	name:Synonym:Elongator core complex	info:Definition:A heterohexameric protein complex that is involved in tRNA modification, and exerts indirect effects on transcriptional elongation and exocytosis. The complex can associate physically with hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II; it contains two discrete heterotrimeric subcomplexes.
0033593	name:Name:BRCA2-MAGE-D1 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex formed of BRCA2 and MAGE-D1; may mediate the synergistic activities of the two proteins in regulating cell growth.
0033596	name:Name:TSC1-TSC2 complex	name:Synonym:tuberin-hamartin complex 	name:Synonym:tuberous sclerosis complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of tumerin and hamartin; its formation may regulate hamartin homomultimer formation. The complex acts as a GTPase activating protein (GAP) for the small GTPase (Rheb), and inhibits the TOR signaling pathway.
0033597	name:Name:mitotic checkpoint complex	name:Synonym:MCC	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that functions as a mitotic checkpoint inhibitor of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). In budding yeast this complex consists of Mad2p, Mad3p, Bub3p and Cdc20p, and in mammalian cells it consists of MAD2, BUBR1, BUB3, and CDC20.
0033607	name:Name:SOD1-Bcl-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex formed of superoxide dismutase 1 and Bcl-2. Complex formation is thought to link superoxide dismutase to an apoptotic pathway.
0034044	name:Name:exomer complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a coat structure on vesicles involved in exocytosis of proteins from the trans-Golgi network to the cell surface; in Saccharomyces, the complex contains Chs5p, Chs6p, and Chs6p paralogues.
0034064	name:Name:Tor2-Mei2-Ste11 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the transcription factor Ste11 and the RNA binding protein Mei2; involved in regulation of conjugation in fission yeast.
0034066	name:Name:Ric1p-Rgp1p complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as a nucleotide exchange factor for the GTPase Ypt6p, and is required for fusion of endosome-derived vesicles with the Golgi.
0034081	name:Name:polyketide synthase complex	name:Synonym:PKS	name:Synonym:PKS complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that carries out enzymatic reactions involved in the biosynthesis of polyketides, any of a diverse group of natural products synthesized via linear poly-beta-ketones.
0034082	name:Name:type II polyketide synthase complex	name:Synonym:type II PKS	name:Synonym:type II PKS complex	name:Synonym:type II polyketide synthase	info:Definition:A polyketide synthase complex that consists of several different polypeptide chains, each of which catalyzes a single reaction.
0034083	name:Name:type III polyketide synthase complex	name:Synonym:type III PKS	name:Synonym:type III PKS complex	name:Synonym:type III polyketide synthase	info:Definition:A polyketide synthase complex that consists of two identical ketosynthase polypeptides.
0034098	name:Name:Cdc48p-Npl4p-Ufd1p AAA ATPase complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein ATPase complex required for the efficient dislocation of ER-lumenal degradation substrates, and their subsequent proteolysis by the proteasome. In budding yeast, this complex includes Cdc48p, Npl4p and Ufd1p proteins.
0034099	name:Name:luminal surveillance complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that recognizes ERAD-luminal misfolded substrates and brings them to the ubiquitination/extraction machinery. In yeast, this complex consists of Yos9p, Kar2p and Hrd3p proteins.
0034270	name:Name:CVT complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in the CVT pathway. In budding yeast, the CVT complex consists of multimers of preApe1p.
0034273	name:Name:Atg1p signaling complex	name:Synonym:Atg1p signalling complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains a protein kinase and is required for the autophagosome formation. In budding yeast this complex consists of the kinase Atg1p, Atg13p and Atg17p.
0034274	name:Name:Atg12-Atg5-Atg16 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the expansion of the autophagosomal membrane. In budding yeast, this complex consists of Atg12p, Atg5p and Atg16p.
0034388	name:Name:Pwp2p-containing subcomplex of 90S preribosome	name:Synonym:25-30 S subcomplex of 90S preribosome	name:Synonym:UTP-B complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a subcomplex of the 90S preribosome and can interact directly with the 5' External Transcribed Spacer (ETS) of the full length pre-rRNA transcript. In S. cerevisiae, it sediments at 25-30 S and is composed of Pwp2p, Dip2p, Utp21p, Utp13p, Utp18p, and Utp6p.
0034424	name:Name:Vps55/Vps68 complex	info:Definition:A membrane-associated protein complex that is required for a late stage of endosomal transport. In budding yeast, this complex consists of Vps55p and Vps68p proteins.
0034448	name:Name:EGO complex	info:Definition:A vacuolar membrane-associated protein complex that is required for activation of microautophagy during exit from rapamycin-induced growth arrest. In budding yeast, S. cerevisiae, this complex includes Meh1p, Gtr2p and Slm4p.
0034449	name:Name:GSE complex	name:Synonym:GTPase-containing complex for Gap1p sorting in the endosome	info:Definition:A conserved protein complex required for protein sorting from endosome to the plasma membrane. In budding yeast, S. cerevisiae, this complex includes Gtr1p, Gtr2p, Slm4p, Meh1p and Ltv1p and it sorts Gap1p.
0034455	name:Name:t-UTP complex	name:Synonym:Nan1p-containing subcomplex of 90S preribosome	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a subcomplex of the 90S preribosome and is required for the subsequent assembly of the rest of the preribosome. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Utp5p, Utp4p, Nan1p, Utp8p, Utp9p, Utp10 and Utp15p.
0034456	name:Name:UTP-C complex	name:Synonym:Rrp7p-containing subcomplex of 90S preribosome	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a subcomplex of the 90S preribosome. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Rrp7p, Utp22p, Ckb1p, Cka1p, Ckb2p and Cka2p.
0034457	name:Name:Mpp10 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a subcomplex of the 90S preribosome. In S. cerevisiae, it is composed of Mpp10p, Imp3p and Imp4p.
0034464	name:Name:BBSome	name:Synonym:Bardet-Biedl syndrome complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that associates with the primary cilium and is involved in cilium biogenesis; consists of seven conserved proteins: BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS5, BBS7, BBS8 and BBS9.
0034518	name:Name:RNA cap binding complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that binds to a specialized RNA cap structure at any time in the lifetime of the RNA.
0005845	name:Name:mRNA cap binding complex	name:Synonym:mRNA cap complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that binds to an mRNA cap at any time in the lifetime of the mRNA.
0005846	name:Name:nuclear cap binding complex	name:Synonym:CBC	name:Synonym:mRNA cap binding complex	name:Synonym:NCBP-NIP1 complex	name:Synonym:snRNA cap binding complex	info:Definition:A conserved heterodimeric protein complex that binds to the 5' terminal cap structure m7G(5')ppp(5')N of nascent eukaryotic RNA polymerase II transcripts such as pre-mRNA and U snRNA. The consists of proteins known as CBP20 and CBP80, binds to cap structures in the nucleus, and is involved in pre-mRNA splicing, 3'-end formation, and RNA nuclear export.
0034519	name:Name:cytoplasmic RNA cap binding complex	info:Definition:A protein complex found in the cytoplasm that binds the 5' cap structure of an mRNA, and typically consists of the cap-binding protein eIF4E, the adaptor protein eIF4G, and a multi-factor complex comprising eIF1, eIF2, eIF3 and eIF5. This complex mediates recruitment of the 40S subunit to mRNA.
0034615	name:Name:GCH1 complex	name:Synonym:GTP cyclohydrolase I complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses GTP cyclohydrolase I activity. In E. coli and human, the complex is a homodecamer, and monomers are catalytically inactive.
0034657	name:Name:GID complex	info:Definition:A protein complex with ubiquitin ligase activity that is involved in proteasomal degradation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase during the transition from gluconeogenic to glycolytic growth conditions. In S. cerevisiae, the GID (Glucose Induced degradation Deficient) complex consists of Vid30p, Rmd5p, Vid24p, Vid28p, Gid7p, Gid8p, and Fyv10p.
0034662	name:Name:CFTR-NHERF-ezrin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains ezrin, Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF, also called EBP50), and two copies of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). The CFTR molecules interact with NHERF via their cytoplasmic tail domains; the complex is thought to link the CFTR channel to the actin cytoskeleton and contribute to the regulation of channel activity.
0034663	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum chaperone complex	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum network complex	name:Synonym:ER chaperone complex	name:Synonym:ER network complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is located in the endoplasmic reticulum and is composed of chaperone proteins, including BiP, GRP94; CaBP1, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), ERdj3, cyclophilin B, ERp72, GRP170, UDP-glucosyltransferase, and SDF2-L1.
0034664	name:Name:Ig heavy chain-bound endoplasmic reticulum chaperone complex	name:Synonym:Ig heavy chain-bound ER chaperone complex	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin heavy chain-bound endoplasmic reticulum chaperone complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is formed by the association of an immunoglobulin heavy chain with the proteins of the ER chaperone complex; the latter include BiP, GRP94; CaBP1, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), ERdj3, cyclophilin B, ERp72, GRP170, UDP-glucosyltransferase, and SDF2-L1.
0034673	name:Name:inhibin-betaglycan-ActRII complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of inhibin, type III transforming growth factor beta receptor (also known as betaglycan), and the type II activin receptor ActRII. The complex is thought to negatively regulate the activity of activin B.
0034692	name:Name:E.F.G complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that comprises three core spliceosomal proteins, designated E, F, and G. Formation of the E.F.G complex is essential but not sufficient for the formation of a stable U1 snRNP complex.
0034702	name:Name:ion channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that spans a membrane and forms a water-filled channel across the phospholipid bilayer allowing selective ion transport down its electrochemical gradient.
0005892	name:Name:nicotinic acetylcholine-gated receptor-channel complex	name:Synonym:nicotinic acetylcholine receptor	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as an acetylcholine receptor, and forms a transmembrane channel through which ions may pass in response to ligand binding. The complex is a homo- or heteropentamer of subunits that are members of a neurotransmitter receptor superfamily.
0008282	name:Name:ATP-sensitive potassium channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that comprises four pore-forming (Kir6.x) and four regulatory sulphonylurea receptor (SURx) subunits and forms a transmembrane channel through which ions may pass. The opening and closing of the channel is regulated by ATP: binding of ATP to the Kir6.2 subunit inhibits channel activity, whereas binding of Mg2+-complexed ATP or ADP to the SUR1 subunit stimulates channel activity.
0034703	name:Name:cation channel complex	info:Definition:An ion channel complex through which cations pass.
0034707	name:Name:chloride channel complex	info:Definition:An ion channel complex through which chloride ions pass.
0034708	name:Name:methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses methyltransferase activity.
0031533	name:Name:mRNA cap methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:mRNA (guanine-N7) methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:mRNA capping enzyme complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an RNA 5' triphosphatase and a guanyl transferase (Cet1p and Ceg1p in S. cerevisiae; Pct1 and Ceg1 in S. pombe) and is involved in mRNA capping.
0034709	name:Name:methylosome	name:Synonym:20S methylosome	name:Synonym:20S methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A large (20 S) protein complex that possesses protein arginine methyltransferase activity and modifies specific arginines to dimethylarginines in the arginine- and glycine-rich domains of several spliceosomal Sm proteins, thereby targeting these proteins to the survival of motor neurons (SMN) complex for assembly into small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) core particles. Proteins found in the methylosome include the methyltransferase JBP1 (PRMT5), pICln (CLNS1A), MEP50 (WDR77), and unmethylated forms of SM proteins that have RG domains.
0035097	name:Name:histone methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric complex that is able to catalyze the addition of methyl groups to histone proteins.
0035657	name:Name:eRF1 methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:eRF1 MTase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex required for the methylation of a glutamine (Gln) residue in the protein release factor eRF1. In S. cerevisiae, this complex consists of at least Trm112p and Mtq2p.
0043527	name:Name:tRNA methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric protein complex involved in the methylation of specific nucleotides in tRNA.
0043853	name:Name:methanol-CoM methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:methanol-coenzyme M methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:methanol: coenzyme M methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:methanol: CoM methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:methanol:CoM methyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A heterotrimeric protein complex composed of a methanol methyltransferase subunit, a corrinoid protein and a methanol-specific corrinoid:coenzyme M methyltransferase subunit. Catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from methanol to coenzyme M as part of the pathway of methanogenesis from methanol.
0034715	name:Name:pICln-Sm protein complex	name:Synonym:6S pICln complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains pICln (CLNS1A) and several Sm proteins, including SmD1, SmD2, SmE, SmF, and SmG.
0034716	name:Name:Gemin3-Gemin4-Gemin5 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Gemin3 (DDX20), Gemin4, and Gemin5, and can bind to snRNAs; may be an intermediate in SMN complex assembly.
0034717	name:Name:Gemin6-Gemin7-unrip complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Gemin6, Gemin7, and unrip (STRAP), and can bind to snRNAs; may play a role in snRNP assembly.
0034718	name:Name:SMN-Gemin2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein and Gemin2; may form the stable core of the larger SMN complex.
0034719	name:Name:SMN-Sm protein complex	name:Synonym:SMN-containing protein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of several methylated Sm proteins with the SMN complex; the latter contains the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein and at least eight additional integral components, including the Gemin2-8 and unrip proteins; additional proteins, including galectin-1 and galectin-3, are also found in the SMN-SM complex. The SMN-Sm complex is involved in spliceosomal snRNP assembly in the cytoplasm.
0034730	name:Name:SmD-containing SMN-Sm protein complex	name:Synonym:SMN-containing protein complex	info:Definition:An SMN-Sm protein complex formed by the association of the methylated Sm proteins B/B', D1, D2, D3, E, F, and G with the SMN complex.
0034731	name:Name:Lsm-containing SMN-Sm protein complex	name:Synonym:SMN-containing protein complex	info:Definition:An SMN-Sm protein complex formed by the association of the methylated Sm proteins B/B', D3, E, F, and G, and Lsm10 and Lsm11, with the SMN complex. This complex forms Sm cores on U7 snRNA.
0034741	name:Name:APC-tubulin-IQGAP1 complex	name:Synonym:60S APC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), alpha-tubulin, gamma-tubulin, and the Rac1 and Cdc42 effector IQGAP1; may play a role in cytoskeleton organization.
0034742	name:Name:APC-Axin-1-beta-catenin complex	name:Synonym:23S APC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), Axin-1, and beta-catenin.
0034743	name:Name:APC-IQGAP complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and the Rac1 and Cdc42 effector IQGAP1; may play a role in cytoskeleton organization and cell migration.
0034744	name:Name:APC-IQGAP1-Cdc42 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), the small GTPase Cdc42, and the Rac1 and Cdc42 effector IQGAP1; may play a role in cytoskeleton organization and cell migration.
0034745	name:Name:APC-IQGAP1-Rac1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), the small GTPase Rac1, and the Rac1 and Cdc42 effector IQGAP1; may play a role in cytoskeleton organization and cell migration.
0034746	name:Name:APC-IQGAP1-CLIP-170 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), the small GTPase Cdc42, and CLIP-170; may play a role in cytoskeleton organization and cell migration.
0034747	name:Name:Axin-APC-beta-catenin-GSK3B complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), Axin-1, beta-catenin, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta. Formation of this complex leads to phosphorylation of beta-catenin and down-regulation of beta-catenin activity.
0034748	name:Name:Par3-APC-KIF3A complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Par3, the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), and the kinesin-related protein KIF3A; involved in establishing neuronal cell polarity.
0034749	name:Name:Scrib-APC complex	name:Synonym:hScrib-APC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the Scribble protein (a cell polarity determinant) and the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC); may be involved in the control of cell proliferation.
0034750	name:Name:Scrib-APC-beta-catenin complex	name:Synonym:hScrib-APC-beta-catenin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the Scribble protein (a cell polarity determinant), the tumor suppressor protein adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), and beta-catenin; may be involved in the control of cell proliferation.
0034973	name:Name:Sid2-Mob1 complex	name:Synonym:Dbf2p-Mob1p complex	name:Synonym:Sid2-Mob1 kinase complex	name:Synonym:Sid2p-Mob1p complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains a protein kinase (Sid2 in S. pombe) and its regulatory subunit (Mob1). The Sid2p-Mob1p kinase complex is a component of the septation initiation network in fission yeast (called the mitotic exit network in S. cerevisiae) and is required for cytokinesis. The analogous complex in S. cerevisiae is called Dbf2p-Mob1p complex.
0034974	name:Name:Swi5-Swi2 complex	name:Synonym:Swi5 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex involved that contains proteins known in Schizosaccharomyces as Swi5 monomers and Swi2, and is involved in mating type switching.
0034977	name:Name:ABIN2-NFKB1-MAP3K8 complex	name:Synonym:ABIN2-NFKB1-TPL-1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the precursor form of NF-kappaB (p105), the NF-kappaB inhibitor ABIN-2, and the kinase TPL-2 (MAP3K8); the complex stabilizes TPL-2 and is involved in signaling in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages.
0034978	name:Name:PDX1-PBX1b-MRG1 complex	name:Synonym:acinar cell-specific C complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the homeodomain proteins PDX1, PBX1b and MRG1 (MEIS2) and is involved in the transcriptional regulation of pancreatic acinar cell-specific genes.
0034985	name:Name:Ecsit-NDUFAF1 complex	info:Definition:Any large protein complex that contains Ecsit and NDUFAF1, is located in the mitochondrion, and is involved in the assembly of complex I of the oxidative phosphorylation system. In mammalian cells, three complexes of approximately 500, 600, and 850 kDa containing the 45 kDa isoform of Ecsit and NDUFAF1 have been observed.
0034993	name:Name:SUN-KASH complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that spans the nuclear outer and inner membranes, thereby linking the major cytoplasmic cytoskeleton elements to the nuclear lumen; the complex is conserved in eukaryotes and contains proteins with SUN and KASH domains.
0034995	name:Name:SC5b-7 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consist of complement components C5b6 and C7 stably inserted in a cell membrane. Formation of the SC5b-7 complex is the first phase of membrane attack complex assembly.
0034996	name:Name:RasGAP-Fyn-Lyn-Yes complex	name:Synonym:p21(ras)GAP-Fyn-Lyn-Yes complex, thrombin stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a GTPase activator protein (GAP) for Ras and three Src family protein tyrosine kinases, Fyn, Lyn and Yes. The complex is involved in signaling upon platelet activation.
0034997	name:Name:alphav-beta5 integrin-vitronectin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB5-VTN complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that comprises one integrin alphav subunit, one integrin beta5 subunit, and vitronectin.
0035145	name:Name:exon-exon junction complex	name:Synonym:EJC	info:Definition:A multi-subunit complex deposited by the spliceosome upstream of messenger RNA exon-exon junctions. The exon-exon junction complex provides a binding platform for factors involved in mRNA export and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
0035301	name:Name:Hedgehog signaling complex	name:Synonym:Hedgehog signalling complex	name:Synonym:HSC	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that binds microtubules in a Hedgehog-dependent manner, and is required for signal transduction by members of the Hedgehog family of proteins. The core components of the complex are the serine/threonine protein kinase Fused, the kinesin motor protein Costal2 (Cos2), and a zinc finger transcription factor (Gli family members in humans, and Cubitus interruptus (Ci) in Drosophila).
0035354	name:Name:Toll-like receptor 1-Toll-like receptor 2 protein complex	name:Synonym:TLR1-TLR2 protein complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex containing Toll-like receptor 1 (TLR1) and Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2).
0035355	name:Name:Toll-like receptor 2-Toll-like receptor 6 protein complex	name:Synonym:TLR2-TLR6 protein complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex containing Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and Toll-like receptor 6 (TLR6).
0035369	name:Name:pre-B cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:pre-BCR	info:Definition:An immunoglobulin-like complex that is present in at least the plasma membrane of pre-B cells, and that is composed of two identical immunoglobulin heavy chains and two surrogate light chains, each composed of the lambda-5 and VpreB proteins, and a signaling subunit, a heterodimer of the Ig-alpha and Ig-beta proteins.
0035550	name:Name:urease complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein nickel-containing complex that possesses urease activity (catalysis of the hydrolysis of urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide).
0035632	name:Name:mitochondrial prohibitin complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial inner membrane prohibitin complex	info:Definition:A complex composed of two proteins, prohibitin 1 and prohibitin 2 (PHB1/PHB-1 and PHB2/PHB-2) that is highly conserved amongst eukaryotes and associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrial prohibitin complex is a macromolecular supercomplex composed of repeating heterodimeric subunits of PHB1 and PHB2. The mitochondrial prohibitin complex plays a role in a number of biological processes, including mitochondrial biogenesis and function, development, replicative senescence, and cell death.
0035649	name:Name:Nrd1 complex	info:Definition:A complex that functions in transcription termination of RNA polymerase II transcribed non-coding RNAs. This complex interacts with the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of PolII and the terminator sequences in the nascent RNA transcript. In yeast this complex consists of Nrd1p, Nab3p, and Sen1p.
0035658	name:Name:Mon1-Ccz1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that functions as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and converts Rab-GDP to Rab-GTP. In S. cerevisiae, this complex consists of at least Mon1 and Ccz1, and serves as a GEF for the Rab Ypt7p.
0035693	name:Name:NOS2-CD74 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex comprising nitric oxide synthase 2 and CD74. This stable complex formation is thought to prevent CD74 degradation by caspases.
0035808	name:Name:meiotic recombination initiation complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that initiates the formation of double-strand breaks (DSBs) required for meiotic recombination. Consists of a protein that catalyses formation of the double-strand breaks (Spo11 in S. cerevisiae and Rec12 in S. pombe), and a number of accessory proteins.
0035859	name:Name:Seh1-associated complex	name:Synonym:SEA complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that associates dynamically with the vacuolar membrane, and is proposed to have a role in membrane-associated trafficking or regulatory processes. In S. cerevisiae the complex contains Seh1p, Sec13p, Npr2p, Npr3p, Iml1p, Mtc5p, Rtc1p, and Sea4p.
0035866	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-PKCalpha complex	name:Synonym:alphav-beta3 integrin-PKCa complex	name:Synonym:alphav-beta3 integrin-protein kinase C alpha complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to protein kinase C alpha.
0035867	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-IGF-1-IGF1R complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and type I insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R). IGF1R is a heterotetramer that consists of two alpha-subunits and two beta-subunits.
0035868	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-HMGB1 complex	name:Synonym:alphav-beta3 integrin-high mobility group box 1 complex	name:Synonym:alphaV-beta3 integrin-HMGB1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to high mobility group box 1 protein.
0042272	name:Name:nuclear RNA export factor complex	name:Synonym:Mex67-Mtr2 complex	name:Synonym:NXF1-NXT1 complex	name:Synonym:TAP-p15 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains two proteins (know in several organisms, including Drosophila, as NXF1 and NXF2) and is required for the export of the majority of mRNAs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm; localized in the nucleoplasm and at both the nucleoplasmic and cytoplasmic faces of the nuclear pore complex; shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
0042555	name:Name:MCM complex	name:Synonym:mini-chromosome maintenance complex	info:Definition:A hexameric protein complex required for the initiation and regulation of DNA replication.
0042575	name:Name:DNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses DNA polymerase activity and is involved in template directed synthesis of DNA.
0005760	name:Name:gamma DNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A DNA polymerase complex consisting of a large subunit, responsible for the catalytic activities, and a small accessory subunit. Functions in the replication and repair of mitochondrial DNA.
0008622	name:Name:epsilon DNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase epsilon complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric DNA polymerase complex that catalyzes processive DNA synthesis in the absence of PCNA, but is further stimulated in the presence of PCNA. The complex contains a large catalytic subunit and three small subunits, and is best characterized in Saccharomyces, in which the subunits are named Pol2p, Dpb2p, Dpb3p, and Dpb4p. Some evidence suggests that DNA polymerase epsilon is the leading strand polymerase; it is also involved in nucleotide-excision repair and mismatch repair.
0009355	name:Name:DNA polymerase V complex	info:Definition:A DNA polymerase complex that contains two UmuD' and one UmuC subunits, and acts in translesion DNA synthesis.
0009360	name:Name:DNA polymerase III complex	info:Definition:A DNA polymerase complex that contains two complexes of the catalytic alpha, beta, delta and epsilon polymerase/exonuclease subunits, plus the DnaX complex, a heptamer that includes the tau and gamma products of the dnaX gene and confers structural asymmetry that allows the polymerase to replicate both leading and lagging strands.
0016035	name:Name:zeta DNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric DNA polymerase complex that catalyzes error-prone DNA synthesis in contexts such as translesion synthesis and double-stranded break repair. First characterized in Saccharomyces, in which the subunits are Rev3p and Rev7p; a third protein, Rev1p, is often associated with the polymerase dimer.
0043625	name:Name:delta DNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:delta-DNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric DNA polymerase enzyme complex which differs in composition amongst species; in humans it is a heterotetramer of four subunits of approximately 125, 50, 68 and 12kDa, while in S. cerevisiae, it has three different subunits which form a heterotrimer, and the active enzyme is a dimer of this heterotrimer. Functions in DNA replication, mismatch repair and excision repair.
0042611	name:Name:MHC protein complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex composed of an MHC alpha chain and, in most cases, either an MHC class II beta chain or an invariant beta2-microglobin chain, and with or without a bound peptide, lipid, or polysaccharide antigen.
0032398	name:Name:MHC class Ib protein complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex composed of a MHC class Ib alpha chain and, in most cases, an invariant beta2-microglobin chain, and with or without a bound peptide or lipid antigen. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 or HLA-E gene families.
0042612	name:Name:MHC class I protein complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex composed of a MHC class I alpha chain and an invariant beta2-microglobin chain, and with or without a bound peptide antigen. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
0042613	name:Name:MHC class II protein complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex composed of an MHC class II alpha and MHC class II beta chain, and with or without a bound peptide or polysaccharide antigen.
0042652	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I, peripheral segment	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex, peripheral segment	name:Synonym:NADH-Q oxidoreductase complex, peripheral segment	info:Definition:The peripheral segment of respiratory chain complex I located in the mitochondrion. Respiratory chain complex I is an enzyme of the respiratory chain, consisting of at least 34 polypeptide chains. The electrons of NADH enter the chain at this complex. The complete complex is L-shaped, with a horizontal arm lying in the membrane and a vertical arm that projects into the matrix.
0042653	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I, membrane segment	name:Synonym:NADH-Q oxidoreductase complex, membrane segment	info:Definition:The mitochondrial membrane segment of respiratory chain complex I. Respiratory chain complex I is an enzyme of the respiratory chain, consisting of at least 34 polypeptide chains. The electrons of NADH enter the chain at this complex. The complete complex is L-shaped, with a horizontal arm lying in the membrane and a vertical arm that projects into the matrix.
0042719	name:Name:mitochondrial intermembrane space protein transporter complex	name:Synonym:Tim9-Tim10 complex	info:Definition:Soluble complex of the mitochondrial intermembrane space composed of various combinations of small Tim proteins; acts as a protein transporter to guide proteins to the Tim22 complex for insertion into the mitochondrial inner membrane.
0042720	name:Name:mitochondrial inner membrane peptidase complex	name:Synonym:IMP	info:Definition:Protease complex of the mitochondrial inner membrane, consisting of at least two subunits, involved in processing of both nuclear- and mitochondrially-encoded proteins targeted to the intermembrane space.
0042721	name:Name:mitochondrial inner membrane protein insertion complex	name:Synonym:Tim22 complex	info:Definition:A multi-subunit complex embedded in the mitochondrial inner membrane that mediates insertion of carrier proteins into the inner membrane.
0042729	name:Name:DASH complex	name:Synonym:condensed nuclear chromosome kinetochore-associated DASH complex	name:Synonym:Dam1 complex	name:Synonym:DDD complex	name:Synonym:Duo1p-Dam1p-Dad1p complex	info:Definition:A large protein complex, containing around 8-10 subunits in yeast, including Duo1p, Dam1p, Dad1p and Ask1p. The complex forms part of the kinetochore, associates with microtubules when the kinetochore attaches to the spindle, and plays a role in spindle attachment, chromosome segregation and spindle stability.
0042765	name:Name:GPI-anchor transamidase complex	name:Synonym:GPIT complex	info:Definition:An enzyme complex which in humans and yeast consists of at least five proteins; for example, the complex contains GAA1, GPI8, PIG-S, PIG-U, and PIG-T in human, and Gaa1p, Gab1p, Gpi8p, Gpi16p, and Gpi17p in yeast. Catalyzes the posttranslational attachment of the carboxyl-terminus of a precursor protein to a GPI-anchor.
0042824	name:Name:MHC class I peptide loading complex	info:Definition:A large, multisubunit complex which consists of the MHC class I-beta 2 microglobulin dimer, the transporter associated with antigen presentation (TAP), tapasin (an MHC-encoded membrane protein), the chaperone calreticulin and the thiol oxidoreductase ERp57. Functions in the assembly of peptides with newly synthesized MHC class I molecules.
0042825	name:Name:TAP complex	name:Synonym:transporter associated with antigen presentation	info:Definition:A heterodimer composed of the subunits TAP1 and TAP2 (transporter associated with antigen presentation). Functions in the transport of antigenic peptides from the cytosol to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum.
0043020	name:Name:NADPH oxidase complex	name:Synonym:flavocytochrome b558	name:Synonym:respiratory-burst oxidase	info:Definition:A enzyme complex of which the core is a heterodimer composed of a light (alpha) and heavy (beta) chain, and requires several other water-soluble proteins of cytosolic origin for activity. Functions in superoxide generation by the NADPH-dependent reduction of O2.
0043033	name:Name:isoamylase complex	name:Synonym:debranching enzyme complex	info:Definition:A protein complex whose composition varies amongst species; in rice it probably exists in a homo-tetramer to homo-hexamer form and in Gram-negative bacteria as a dimer. Functions in the hydrolysis of alpha-(1,6)-D-glucosidic branch linkages.
0010367	name:Name:extracellular isoamylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex whose composition varies amongst species; in rice it probably exists in a homo-tetramer to homo-hexamer form and in Gram negative bacteria as a dimer. Functions in the hydrolysis of alpha-(1,6)-D-glucosidic branch linkages. Isoamylases in animals are localized in the extracellular space.
0010368	name:Name:chloroplast isoamylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex whose composition varies amongst species; in rice it probably exists in a homo-tetramer to homo-hexamer form and in Gram negative bacteria as a dimer. Functions in the hydrolysis of alpha-(1,6)-D-glucosidic branch linkages. Isoamylases in plants are intracellular and probably chloroplast localized.
0043190	name:Name:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex	name:Synonym:ABC-type efflux permease complex	name:Synonym:ABC-type efflux porter complex	name:Synonym:ABC-type uptake permease complex	name:Synonym:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex	name:Synonym:mating pheromone exporter	info:Definition:A complex for the transport of metabolites into and out of the cell, typically comprised of four domains; two membrane-associated domains and two ATP-binding domains at the intracellular face of the membrane, that form a central pore through the plasma membrane. Each of the four core domains may be encoded as a separate polypeptide or the domains can be fused in any one of a number of ways into multidomain polypeptides. In Bacteria and Archaebacteria, ABC transporters also include substrate binding proteins to bind substrate external to the cytoplasm and deliver it to the transporter.
0035796	name:Name:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex, transmembrane substrate-binding subunit-containing	name:Synonym:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex, ECF-type	name:Synonym:energy coupling factor (ECF)-type ABC transporter	name:Synonym:energy-coupling factor transporter	info:Definition:A complex for the transport of metabolites into the cell, consisting of 4 subunits: a transmembrane substrate-binding protein (known as the S component), and an energy-coupling module that comprises two ATP-binding proteins (known as the A and A' components) and a transmembrane protein (known as the T component). Transport of the substrate across the membrane is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP.
0055051	name:Name:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex, integrated substrate binding	info:Definition:A complex for the transport of metabolites out of the cell, consisting of 4 domains: two ATP-binding domains and two membrane spanning domains. In some cases, all 4 domains are contained on 1 polypeptide, while in others one ATP-binding domain and one membrane spanning domain are together on one polypeptide in what is called a \"half transporter\". Two \"half-transporters\" come together to form a functional transporter. Transport of the substrate across the membrane is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP.
0055052	name:Name:ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter complex, substrate-binding subunit-containing	info:Definition:A complex for the transport of metabolites into the cell, consisting of 5 subunits: two ATP-binding subunits, two membrane spanning subunits, and one substrate-binding subunit. In organisms with two membranes, the substrate-binding protein moves freely in the periplasmic space and joins the other subunits only when bound with substrate. In organisms with only one membrane the substrate-binding protein is tethered to the cytoplasmic membrane and associated with the other subunits. Transport of the substrate across the membrane is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP.
0043235	name:Name:receptor complex	info:Definition:Any protein complex that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
0002116	name:Name:semaphorin receptor complex	name:Synonym:plexin-neurophilin complex	info:Definition:A stable binary complex of a neurophilin and a plexin, together forming a functional semaphorin receptor.
0005785	name:Name:signal recognition particle receptor complex	name:Synonym:docking protein complex	name:Synonym:SR complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane heterodimeric protein located in the membrane of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Both subunits contain GTPase domains with which signal recognition particle interacts. In the presence of GTP and SRP receptor, SRP is released from the ribosome-nascent chain complex.
0005893	name:Name:interleukin-2 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-2 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-2; comprises alpha, beta, and gamma subunits.
0005894	name:Name:interleukin-3 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-3 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-3; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit. The alpha chain is specific to the interleukin-3 receptor, whereas the beta chain is shared with the receptors for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-5.
0005895	name:Name:interleukin-5 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-5 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-3; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit. The alpha chain is specific to the interleukin-5 receptor, whereas the beta chain is shared with the receptors for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-3.
0005896	name:Name:interleukin-6 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-6 receptor complex	info:Definition:A hexameric protein complex consisting of two molecules each of interleukin-6, interleukin-6 receptor alpha chain, and gp-130.
0005897	name:Name:interleukin-9 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-9 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-9; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit. The alpha chain is specific to the interleukin-9 receptor, whereas the beta chain is shared with the receptors for several other interleukins.
0005898	name:Name:interleukin-13 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-13 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-13; consists of two chains, interleukin-13 receptor alpha1 chain and interleukin-4 receptor alpha chain.
0005899	name:Name:insulin receptor complex	info:Definition:A disulfide-bonded, heterotetrameric receptor complex. The alpha chains are entirely extracellular, while each beta chain has one transmembrane domain. The ligand binds to the alpha subunit extracellular domain and the kinase is associated with the beta subunit intracellular domain.
0005900	name:Name:oncostatin-M receptor complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric receptor for the cytokine oncostatin-M (OSM). In humans the receptor complex is made up of the gene products gp130 and OSMR-beta.
0008305	name:Name:integrin complex	name:Synonym:laminin receptor protein	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of one alpha subunit and one beta subunit, both of which are members of the integrin superfamily of cell adhesion receptors; the complex spans the plasma membrane and binds to extracellular matrix ligands, cell-surface ligands, and soluble ligands.
0008328	name:Name:ionotropic glutamate receptor complex	info:Definition:A multimeric assembly of four or five subunits which form a structure with an extracellular N-terminus and a large loop that together form the ligand binding domain. The C-terminus is intracellular. The ionotropic glutamate receptor complex itself acts as a ligand-gated ion channel; on binding glutamate, charged ions pass through a channel in the center of the receptor complex.
0016516	name:Name:interleukin-4 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-4 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-4 (IL-4) and consists of an alpha chain that binds IL-4 with high affinity and a gamma common chain that also forms part of the interleukin-2 receptor.
0030526	name:Name:granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor complex	name:Synonym:granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor receptor complex	info:Definition:The heterodimeric receptor for granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor.
0030876	name:Name:interleukin-20 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-20 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-20; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit.
0030988	name:Name:high molecular weight kininogen receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as a receptor for high molecular weight kininogens. In humans, this receptor includes the CK1 and uPAR proteins.
0032002	name:Name:interleukin-28 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-28 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-28 and interleukin-29. Composed of two subunits, IL-28R alpha and IL-10R beta.
0034751	name:Name:aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex	name:Synonym:AhR complex	name:Synonym:AHRC	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as an aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor. Cytosolic and nuclear Ah receptor complexes have different subunit composition, but both contain the ligand-binding subunit AhR.
0035631	name:Name:CD40 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains at least CD40 (a cell surface receptor of the tumour necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily), and other signaling molecules.
0035692	name:Name:macrophage migration inhibitory factor receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds macrophage migration inhibitory factor. Comprises CD74 and CD44 cell surface proteins.
0042022	name:Name:interleukin-12 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-12 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL12RB1-IL12RB2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-12; comprises a beta1 and a beta2 subunit.
0042101	name:Name:T cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:T-cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:TCR	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains a disulfide-linked heterodimer of T cell receptor (TCR) chains, which are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, and mediates antigen recognition, ultimately resulting in T cell activation. The TCR heterodimer is associated with the CD3 complex, which consists of the nonpolymorphic polypeptides gamma, delta, epsilon, zeta, and, in some cases, eta (an RNA splice variant of zeta) or Fc epsilon chains.
0043384	name:Name:pre-T cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:pre-T lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:pre-T-cell receptor complex	name:Synonym:pre-T-lymphocyte receptor complex	name:Synonym:pre-TCR complex	info:Definition:A receptor complex found on immature T cells consisting of a T cell receptor beta chain and the pre-TCR-alpha chain, along with additional signaling components including CD3 family members and additional signaling proteins.
0045092	name:Name:interleukin-18 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-18 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-18; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit.
0045323	name:Name:interleukin-1 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-1 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-1; comprises an alpha and a beta subunit.
0046696	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide receptor complex	name:Synonym:LPS receptor complex	info:Definition:A multiprotein complex that consists of at least three proteins, CD14, TLR4, and MD-2, each of which is glycosylated.
0048179	name:Name:activin receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as an activin receptor. Heterodimeric activin receptors, comprising one Type I activin receptor and one Type II receptor polypeptide, and heterotrimeric receptors have been observed.
0070022	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta receptor complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta receptor complex	info:Definition:A dimeric receptor complex that binds transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta); consists of two TGF-beta receptor monomers.
0070110	name:Name:ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as a receptor for the cytokine ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF). In humans the receptor complex is a hexamer composed of two molecules each of CNTF and CNTFR and one molecule each of gp130 and LIFR.
0070195	name:Name:growth hormone receptor complex	info:Definition:A receptor complex that consists of two identical subunits and binds growth hormone.
0070724	name:Name:BMP receptor complex	name:Synonym:bone morphogenetic protein receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that acts as a receptor for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs); a homo- or heterodimer of type I and/or type II BMP receptor subunits.
0072536	name:Name:interleukin-23 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL-23 receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds interleukin-23. The complex comprises two subunits, including the same beta subunit found in the interleukin-12 receptor.
0043240	name:Name:Fanconi anaemia nuclear complex	name:Synonym:FA complex	name:Synonym:FA core complex	name:Synonym:FA nuclear complex	name:Synonym:Fanconi anaemia complex	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of the Fanconi anaemia (FA) proteins including A, C, E, G and F (FANCA-F). Functions in the activation of the downstream protein FANCD2 by monoubiquitylation, and is essential for protection against chromosome breakage.
0043256	name:Name:laminin complex	info:Definition:A large, extracellular glycoprotein complex composed of three different polypeptide chains, alpha, beta and gamma. Provides an integral part of the structural scaffolding of basement membranes.
0005606	name:Name:laminin-1 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha1, beta1 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0005607	name:Name:laminin-2 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha2, beta1 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0005608	name:Name:laminin-3 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha1, beta2 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0005609	name:Name:laminin-4 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha2, beta2 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0005610	name:Name:laminin-5 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha3, beta3 and gamma2 polypeptide chains.
0005611	name:Name:laminin-6 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha3, beta1 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0005612	name:Name:laminin-7 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha3, beta2 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0043257	name:Name:laminin-8 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha4, beta1 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0043258	name:Name:laminin-9 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha4, beta2 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0043259	name:Name:laminin-10 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha5, beta1 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0043260	name:Name:laminin-11 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha5, beta2 and gamma1 polypeptide chains.
0043261	name:Name:laminin-12 complex	info:Definition:A laminin complex composed of alpha2, beta1 and gamma3 polypeptide chains.
0043291	name:Name:RAVE complex	name:Synonym:regulator of the (H+)-ATPase of the vacuolar and endosomal membranes	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex that in Saccharomyces is composed of three subunits, Rav1p, Rav2p and Skp1p. Acts transiently to catalyze assembly of cytoplasmic V1, with membrane embedded V0 to form the V-ATPase holoenzyme.
0043293	name:Name:apoptosome	info:Definition:A multisubunit protein complex involved in the activation of apoptosis. In mammals it is typically composed of seven Apaf-1 subunits bound to cytochrome c and caspase-9. A similar complex to promote apoptosis is formed from homologous gene products in other eukaryotic organisms.
0043493	name:Name:phage terminase complex	info:Definition:A complex of a large and small subunit which catalyze the packaging of DNA into phage heads. Note that not all phage terminases have this structure, some exist as single polypeptides.
0043511	name:Name:inhibin complex	info:Definition:Heterodimeric hormone composed of an inhibin alpha subunit complexed with either an inhibin beta-A subunit, to form inhibin A, or an inhibin beta-B subunit, to form inhibin B.
0043512	name:Name:inhibin A complex	info:Definition:Heterodimeric hormone composed of an inhibin alpha subunit complexed with an inhibin beta-A subunit.
0043513	name:Name:inhibin B complex	info:Definition:Heterodimeric hormone composed of an inhibin alpha subunit complexed with an inhibin beta-B subunit.
0043514	name:Name:interleukin-12 complex	name:Synonym:IL-12 complex	name:Synonym:IL12A	name:Synonym:IL12B	name:Synonym:p35	name:Synonym:p40	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of an interleukin-12 alpha (p35, product of the IL12A gene) and an interleukin-12 beta subunit (p40, product of the IL12B gene) and is secreted into the extracellular space.
0043529	name:Name:GET complex	name:Synonym:Golgi to ER Traffic complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit complex involved in ER/Golgi trafficking (Golgi to ER Traffic). In yeast, includes Get1p, Get2p and Get3p proteins.
0043540	name:Name:6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 1 complex	info:Definition:A homodimeric, bifunctional enzyme complex which catalyzes the synthesis and degradation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, and is required for both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis.
0043541	name:Name:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine transferase complex	info:Definition:A multienzyme, heterooligomeric complex involved in dolichyl-linked oligosaccharide synthesis. In yeast the complex is composed of Alg7p, which catalyzes the first step (GlcNAc1-PP-Dol from dolichol-phosphate and UDP-GlcNAc), and Alg13p plus Alg14p, the catalytic and anchoring subunits respectively, which together catalyze the second step (GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol from GlcNAc1-PP-Dol and UDP-GlcNAc) of dolichyl-linked oligosaccharide synthesis.
0043564	name:Name:Ku70:Ku80 complex	name:Synonym:Ku70:Ku80 heterodimer	info:Definition:Heterodimeric protein complex composed of a 70 kDa and a 80 kDa subunit, binds DNA through a channel formed by the heterodimer. Functions in DNA double stranded break repair, chromosome maintenance, transcription regulation, V(D)J recombination, and activation of DNA-PK.
0043626	name:Name:PCNA complex	name:Synonym:PCNA homotrimer	name:Synonym:proliferating cell nuclear antigen complex	name:Synonym:sliding clamp	info:Definition:A protein complex composed of three identical PCNA monomers, each comprising two similar domains, which are joined in a head-to-tail arrangement to form a homotrimer. Forms a ring-like structure in solution, with a central hole sufficiently large to accommodate the double helix of DNA. Originally characterized as a DNA sliding clamp for replicative DNA polymerases and as an essential component of the replisome, and has also been shown to be involved in other processes including Okazaki fragment processing, DNA repair, translesion DNA synthesis, DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling and cell cycle regulation.
0043684	name:Name:type IV secretion system complex	name:Synonym:T4SS complex	name:Synonym:type IV protein secretion system complex	info:Definition:A complex of proteins related to those involved in bacterial DNA conjugative transfer, that permits the transfer of DNA or proteins into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells. In general the type IV complex forms a multisubunit cell-envelope-spanning structure composed of a secretion channel and often a pilus or other surface filament or protein(s).
0043845	name:Name:DNA polymerase III, proofreading complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, proof-reading complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, proof-reading subcomplex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, proofreading subcomplex	info:Definition:A subcomplex of DNA polymerase III composed of the epsilon subunit which has proofreading activity, and the theta subunit which enhances the epsilon subunit's proofreading activity.
0043846	name:Name:DNA polymerase III, DnaX complex	name:Synonym:clamp loader complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, clamp loader complex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, DnaX subcomplex	info:Definition:A heptamer that includes the tau and gamma products of the dnaX gene and the chi/psi subcomplex. Confers structural asymmetry that allows the polymerase to replicate both leading and lagging strands.
0043847	name:Name:DNA polymerase III, DnaX complex, chi/psi subcomplex	name:Synonym:DNA polymerase III, clamp loader chi/psi subcomplex	info:Definition:A dimer composed of the chi and psi subunits which is a subassembly of the DNA polymerase III DnaX complex and serves as a bridge between the DnaX complex and the single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSB).
0043850	name:Name:RecFOR complex	info:Definition:A heterotrimeric complex composed of the subunits RecF, RecO and RecR. Mediates the loading of RecA protein specifically onto SSB-coated gapped DNA during DNA repair.
0043913	name:Name:chromosome segregation-directing complex	name:Synonym:chromosome segregation directing complex	name:Synonym:longitudinal peptidoglycan synthesis-directing complex	name:Synonym:MreBCD complex	info:Definition:A trimeric protein complex which in E. coli is composed of the subunits MreB, MreC and MreD. The complex directs longitudinal cell wall synthesis, maintaining cell morphology.
0045239	name:Name:tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme complex	name:Synonym:TCA cycle enzyme complex	info:Definition:Any of the heteromeric enzymes that act in the TCA cycle.
0030062	name:Name:mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme complex	name:Synonym:TCA cycle enzyme complex	info:Definition:Any of the heteromeric enzymes, located in the mitochondrion, that act in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
0042709	name:Name:succinate-CoA ligase complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric enzyme complex, usually composed of an alpha and beta chain. Functions in the TCA cycle, hydrolyzing succinyl-CoA into succinate and CoA, thereby forming ATP or GTP.
0045240	name:Name:dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activity.
0045242	name:Name:isocitrate dehydrogenase complex (NAD+)	info:Definition:Complex that possesses isocitrate dehydrogenase (NAD+) activity.
0045246	name:Name:cytosolic tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme complex	name:Synonym:TCA cycle enzyme complex	name:Synonym:tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme complex 	info:Definition:Any of the heteromeric enzymes, located in the cytosol, that act in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
0045251	name:Name:electron transfer flavoprotein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex containing flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, which form a system that oxidizes an acyl-CoA molecule and reduces ubiquinone and other acceptors in the mitochondrial electron transport system.
0017133	name:Name:mitochondrial electron transfer flavoprotein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the mitochondrion. It contains flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) that, together with an acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, forms a system that oxidizes an acyl-CoA molecule and reduces ubiquinone and other acceptors in the mitochondrial electron transport system.
0045247	name:Name:cytosolic electron transfer flavoprotein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the cytosol containing flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) that, together with an acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, forms a system that oxidizes an acyl-CoA molecule and reduces ubiquinone and other acceptors.
0045252	name:Name:oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:dihydrolipoamide S-succinyltransferase complex	info:Definition:A complex of multiple copies of three enzymatic components: oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) ; EC:1.2.4.2 (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-succinyltransferase ; EC:2.3.1.61 (E2) and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase ; EC:1.8.1.4 (E3); catalyzes the overall conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA and carbon dioxide (CO2).
0009353	name:Name:mitochondrial oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A complex of multiple copies of three enzymatic components: oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) ; EC:1.2.4.2 (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-succinyltransferase ; EC:2.3.1.61 (E2) and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase ; EC:1.8.1.4 (E3); catalyzes the overall conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA and carbon dioxide (CO2) within the mitochondrial matrix. An example of this complex is found in Mus musculus.
0045248	name:Name:cytosolic oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A cytosolic complex of multiple copies of three enzymatic components: oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) ; EC:1.2.4.2 (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-succinyltransferase ; EC:2.3.1.61 (E2) and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase ; EC:1.8.1.4 (E3); catalyzes the overall conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA and carbon dioxide (CO2).
0045253	name:Name:pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A complex of a regulatory and catalytic subunit that catalyzes the dephosphorylation and concomitant reactivation of the alpha subunit of the E1 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
0019910	name:Name:mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A mitochondrial complex of a regulatory and catalytic subunit that catalyzes the dephosphorylation and concomitant reactivation of the alpha subunit of the E1 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. An example of this component is found in Mus musculus.
0045249	name:Name:cytosol pyruvate dehydrogenase (lipoamide) phosphatase complex	info:Definition:A cytosolic complex of a regulatory and catalytic subunit that catalyzes the dephosphorylation and concomitant reactivation of the alpha subunit of the E1 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
0045254	name:Name:pyruvate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (lipoamide)	info:Definition:Complex that carries out the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl-CoA; comprises subunits possessing three catalytic activities: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (E2), and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3).
0005967	name:Name:mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (lipoamide)	info:Definition:Complex that carries out the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl-CoA in eukaryotes; includes subunits possessing three catalytic activities: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (E2), and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3). The This Eukaryotic form usually contains more subunits than its bacterial counterpart; for example, one known complex contains 30 E1 dimers, 60 E2 monomers, and 6 E3 dimers as well as a few copies of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase.
0010240	name:Name:plastid pyruvate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:Complex that carries out the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl-CoA; comprises subunits possessing three catalytic activities: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (E2), and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3). This complex is found in plant plastids and is distinct from the one found in mitochondria.
0045250	name:Name:cytosolic pyruvate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (lipoamide)	info:Definition:Complex that carries out the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl-CoA; comprises subunits possessing three catalytic activities: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (E2), and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3). Usually contains fewer subunits than its eukaryotic counterpart; for example, the E. coli complex contains 12 E1 dimers, 8 E2 trimers, and 6 E3 dimers arranged in highly symmetric cubic order.
0045265	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the membrane-associated Fo proteins; is thought to prevent futile rotation of the catalytic core.
0000274	name:Name:mitochondrial proton-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the mitochondrial membrane-associated F0 proteins; is thought to prevent futile rotation of the catalytic core.
0045266	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase, stator stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the plasma membrane-associated F0 proteins; is thought to prevent futile rotation of the catalytic core. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045267	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	info:Definition:The hexamer that possesses the catalytic activity of the mitochondrial hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase.
0005754	name:Name:mitochondrial proton-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	info:Definition:The hexamer, comprising three alpha and three beta subunits, that possesses the catalytic activity of the mitochondrial hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase.
0045268	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase, catalytic core	info:Definition:The hexamer that possesses the catalytic activity of the plasma membrane hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045269	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the membrane-associated Fo proteins; rotates within the catalytic core during catalysis.
0005756	name:Name:mitochondrial proton-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the mitochondrial membrane-associated F0 proteins; rotates within the catalytic core during catalysis.
0045270	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase, central stalk	info:Definition:One of two stalks that connect the catalytic core of the hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase to the plasma membrane-associated Fo proteins; rotates within the catalytic core during catalysis. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045273	name:Name:respiratory chain complex II	name:Synonym:electron transport complex II	info:Definition:A part of the respiratory chain, containing the four polypeptide subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, flavin-adenine dinucleotide and iron-sulfur. Catalyzes the oxidation of succinate by ubiquinone. Connects the TCA cycle with the respiratory chain.
0045274	name:Name:plasma membrane respiratory chain complex II	name:Synonym:respiratory chain complex II	info:Definition:A part of the respiratory chain located in the plasma membrane, containing the four polypeptide subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, flavin-adenine dinucleotide and iron-sulfur. Catalyzes the oxidation of succinate by ubiquinone. Connects the TCA cycle with the respiratory chain. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045275	name:Name:respiratory chain complex III	name:Synonym:complex III	name:Synonym:cytochrome bc(1) complex	name:Synonym:cytochrome bc1 complex	name:Synonym:electron transport complex III	name:Synonym:ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex	name:Synonym:ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that transfers electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c and translocates two protons across a membrane. The complex contains a core structure of three catalytic subunits: cytochrome b, the Rieske iron sulfur protein (ISP), and cytochrome c1, which are arranged in an integral membrane-bound dimeric complex; additional subunits are present, and vary among different species.
0005750	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III	name:Synonym:mitochondrial complex III	name:Synonym:mitochondrial cytochrome bc(1) complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial cytochrome bc1 complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial electron transport complex III	name:Synonym:mitochondrial ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Contains about 10 polypeptide subunits including four redox centers: cytochrome b/b6, cytochrome c1 and an 2Fe-2S cluster. Catalyzes the oxidation of ubiquinol by oxidized cytochrome c1.
0045276	name:Name:plasma membrane respiratory chain complex III	name:Synonym:plasma membrane ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase complex	name:Synonym:respiratory chain complex III	name:Synonym:ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex	name:Synonym:ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase complex	info:Definition:A part of the respiratory chain located in the plasma membrane, containing about 10 polypeptide subunits including four redox centers: cytochrome b/b6, cytochrome c1 and an 2Fe-2S cluster. Catalyzes the oxidation of ubiquinol by oxidized cytochrome c1. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045277	name:Name:respiratory chain complex IV	name:Synonym:cytochrome c oxidase complex	name:Synonym:electron transport complex IV	info:Definition:A part of the respiratory chain, containing the 13 polypeptide subunits of cytochrome c oxidase, including cytochrome a and cytochrome a3. Catalyzes the oxidation of reduced cytochrome c by dioxygen (O2).
0005751	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Contains the 13 polypeptide subunits of cytochrome c oxidase, including cytochrome a and cytochrome a3. Catalyzes the oxidation of reduced cytochrome c by dioxygen (O2).
0045278	name:Name:plasma membrane respiratory chain complex IV	name:Synonym:cytochrome c oxidase complex	name:Synonym:respiratory chain complex IV	info:Definition:A part of the respiratory chain located in the plasma membrane, containing the 13 polypeptide subunits of cytochrome c oxidase, including cytochrome a and cytochrome a3. Catalyzes the oxidation of reduced cytochrome c by dioxygen (O2). Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045281	name:Name:succinate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric complex which consists of flavoprotein (subunit A ; InterPro:IPR003952), iron-sulfur protein (subunit B) and membrane-bound cytochrome b560 (subunit C; InterPro:IPR000701). In some Archaea, the membrane-bound subunits (C or C and D) do not necessarily contain heme. Membrane-bound subunits can bind or react with quinones.
0045257	name:Name:succinate dehydrogenase complex (ubiquinone)	info:Definition:The enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of succinate and ubiquinone to fumarate and ubiquinol; involved in aerobic respiration, repressed in anaerobic respiration.
0045282	name:Name:plasma membrane succinate dehydrogenase complex	name:Synonym:succinate dehydrogenase complex	info:Definition:A multimeric complex which consists of flavoprotein (subunit A ; InterPro:IPR003952), iron-sulfur protein (subunit B) and membrane-bound cytochrome b560 (subunit C; InterPro:IPR000701). In some Archaea, the membrane-bound subunits (C or C and D) do not necessarily contain heme. Membrane-bound subunits can bind/react with quinones. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045283	name:Name:fumarate reductase complex	info:Definition:A membrane-bound flavoenzyme complex consisting of four subunits, A, B, C, and D. A and B comprise the membrane-extrinsic catalytic domain and C (InterPro:IPR003510; InterPro:IPR004224) and D (InterPro:IPR003418) link the catalytic centers to the electron-transport chain. This family consists of the 13 kDa hydrophobic subunit D. This component may be required to anchor the catalytic components of the fumarate reductase complex to the cytoplasmic membrane. Fumarate reductase couples the reduction of fumarate to succinate to the oxidation of quinol to quinone, in a reaction opposite to that catalyzed by the related complex II of the respiratory chain (succinate dehydrogenase-(ubiquinone)).
0005749	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II	name:Synonym:mitochondrial fumarate reductase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Contains the four polypeptide subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, flavin-adenine dinucleotide and iron-sulfur. Catalyzes the oxidation of succinate by ubiquinone. Connects the TCA cycle with the respiratory chain.
0045284	name:Name:plasma membrane fumarate reductase complex	name:Synonym:fumarate reductase complex	info:Definition:A membrane-bound flavoenzyme complex consisting of four subunits, A, B, C, and D. A and B comprise the membrane-extrinsic catalytic domain and C (InterPro:IPR003510; InterPro:IPR00224) and D (InterPro:IPR003418) link the catalytic centers to the electron-transport chain. In some species, the complex has only three subunits, and in these cases, there is only one membrane anchor instead of two. This family consists of the 13 kDa hydrophobic subunit D. This component may be required to anchor the catalytic components of the fumarate reductase complex to the cytoplasmic membrane. Fumarate reductase couples the reduction of fumarate to succinate to the oxidation of quinol to quinone, in a reaction opposite to that catalyzed by the related complex II of the respiratory chain (succinate dehydrogenase-(ubiquinone)). Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045293	name:Name:mRNA editing complex	name:Synonym:editosome	info:Definition:A protein complex that posttranscriptionally catalyzes insertion, deletion or substitution of nucleotides at multiple sites within nascent mRNA transcripts to produce mature mRNAs in eukaryotes.
0031019	name:Name:mitochondrial mRNA editing complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial editosome	info:Definition:An mRNA editing complex found in the mitochondrion. The best characterized example is that of Trypanosoma brucei, which catalyzes the insertion and deletion of uridylates.
0031020	name:Name:plastid mRNA editing complex	name:Synonym:plastid editosome	info:Definition:An mRNA editing complex found in a plastid.
0045298	name:Name:tubulin complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer of tubulins alpha and beta that constitutes the protomer for microtubule assembly.
0046798	name:Name:viral portal complex	info:Definition:A multimeric ring of proteins through which the DNA enters and exits the viral capsid.
0046806	name:Name:viral scaffold	info:Definition:A complex of proteins that form a scaffold around which the viral capsid is constructed.
0046930	name:Name:pore complex	name:Synonym:channel-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:pore	name:Synonym:pore-forming toxin activity	info:Definition:Any small opening in a membrane that allows the passage of gases and/or liquids.
0005579	name:Name:membrane attack complex	name:Synonym:MAC	name:Synonym:membrane attack complex protein alphaM chain	name:Synonym:membrane attack complex protein beta2 chain	name:Synonym:TCC	name:Synonym:terminal complement complex	info:Definition:A protein complex produced by sequentially activated components of the complement cascade inserted into a target cell membrane and forming a pore leading to cell lysis via ion and water flow.
0005643	name:Name:nuclear pore	name:Synonym:NPC	name:Synonym:nuclear pore complex	name:Synonym:nuclear pore membrane protein	info:Definition:Any of the numerous similar discrete openings in the nuclear envelope of a eukaryotic cell, where the inner and outer nuclear membranes are joined.
0005757	name:Name:mitochondrial permeability transition pore complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial PT pore complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that connects the inner and outer membranes of animal mitochondria and acts as a pore that can open transiently to allow free diffusion of solutes between the mitochondrial matrix and the cytosol.
0048180	name:Name:activin complex	info:Definition:A nonsteroidal regulator, composed of two covalently linked inhibin beta subunits, inhibin beta-A and inhibin beta-B (sometimes known as activin beta or activin/inhibin beta). There are three forms of activin complex, activin A, which is composed of 2 inhibin beta-A subunits, activin B, which is composed of 2 inhibin beta-B subunits, and activin AB, which is composed of an inhibin beta-A and an inhibin beta-B subunit.
0043509	name:Name:activin A complex	info:Definition:A nonsteroidal regulator, composed of two covalently linked inhibin beta-A subunits (sometimes known as activin beta-A or activin/inhibin beta-A).
0043510	name:Name:activin B complex	info:Definition:A nonsteroidal regulator, composed of two covalently linked inhibin beta-B subunits (sometimes known as activin beta-B or activin/inhibin beta-B).
0048183	name:Name:activin AB complex	name:Synonym:inhibin beta-A	name:Synonym:inhibin beta-B	info:Definition:A nonsteroidal regulator, composed of two covalently linked inhibin beta subunits (sometimes known as activin beta or activin/inhibin beta), inhibin beta-A and inhibin beta-B.
0048269	name:Name:methionine adenosyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:MAT complex	info:Definition:A multimeric enzyme complex composed of variable numbers of catalytic alpha subunits, and noncatalytic beta subunits. The beta subunits are believed to have a regulatory function. The enzyme complex catalyzes the synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), which is the major methyl group donor, participating in the methylation of proteins, DNA, RNA, phospholipids, and other small molecules.
0048476	name:Name:Holliday junction resolvase complex	name:Synonym:Mus81-Eme1 complex	name:Synonym:resolvasome	info:Definition:A protein complex that mediates the conversion of a Holliday junction into two separate duplex DNA molecules; the complex includes a single- or multisubunit helicase that catalyzes the extension of heteroduplex DNA by branch migration and a nuclease that resolves the junction by nucleolytic cleavage.
0048492	name:Name:ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:RubisCO complex	info:Definition:A complex containing either both large and small subunits or just small subunits which carries out the activity of producing 3-phosphoglycerate from carbon dioxide and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate.
0009573	name:Name:chloroplast ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:chloroplast RubisCO complex	info:Definition:A complex, located in the chloroplast, containing either both large and small subunits or just small subunits which carries out the activity of producing 3-phosphoglycerate from carbon dioxide and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate. An example of this component is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0048494	name:Name:chromatophore ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:RubisCO complex	info:Definition:A complex, located in the chromatophore, containing either both large and small subunits or just small subunits which carries out the activity of producing 3-phosphoglycerate from carbon dioxide and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate.
0055087	name:Name:Ski complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that regulates RNA degradation by the exosome complex. In Saccharomyces the complex has a heterotetrameric stoichiometry consisting of one copy each of Ski2p and Ski3 and two copies of Ski8p.
0055125	name:Name:Nic96 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of the nuclear pore complex, and is required for its correct assembly. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae Nic96 contains Nsp1p, Nup57p, Nup49p, and Nic96p.
0055126	name:Name:Nup82 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of the nuclear pore complex. It forms a subcomplex with Nup159p and Nsp1p, interacts with Nup116p, and is required for proper localization of Nup116p. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae this complex contains Nup82p, Nsp1p, Nup159p, Nup116p, and Gle2p.
0070014	name:Name:sucrase-isomaltase complex	name:Synonym:oligo-1,6-glucosidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses oligo-1,6-glucosidase activity; the complex is a heterodimer located in the cell membrane, and is formed by proteolytic cleavage of a single precursor polypeptide. The two subunits have different substrate specificities.
0070017	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-thrombospondin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-THBS1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to thrombospondin.
0070020	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta1-type II receptor complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta receptor II-TGF-beta1 complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta1-type II receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a dimeric transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) type II receptor bound to a TGF-beta1 dimer.
0070021	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta1-type II receptor-type I receptor complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta 1:type II receptor:type I receptor complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta receptor II-TGF-beta receptor I-TGF-beta1 complex	name:Synonym:TGF-beta1-type II receptor-type I receptor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is formed by the association of a ligand-bound TGF-beta type II receptor dimer with a TGF-beta type I receptor dimer.
0070023	name:Name:interleukin-12-interleukin-12 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL12-IL12 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL12B-IL12RB1-IL12RB2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is formed by the association of a heterodimeric interleukin-12 receptor complex with an interleukin-12 heterodimer.
0070024	name:Name:CD19-Vav-PIK3R1 complex	name:Synonym:CD19-Vav-PI 3-kinase (p85 subunit) complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell surface signaling molecule CD19, the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav, and the regulatory subunit alpha of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K).
0070029	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0070030	name:Name:alphav-beta1 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB1-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta1 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0070031	name:Name:alphav-beta5 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB5-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta5 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0070069	name:Name:cytochrome complex	info:Definition:A protein complex in which at least one of the proteins is a cytochrome, i.e. a heme-containing protein involved in catalysis of redox reactions.
0070214	name:Name:CSK-GAP-A.p62 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the protein-tyrosine kinase CSK and the GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-associated p62 (GAP-A.p62); may mediate translocation of proteins, including GAP and CSK, to membrane or cytoskeletal regions upon c-Src activation.
0070274	name:Name:RES complex	name:Synonym:pre-mRNA retention and splicing complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is required for efficient splicing, and prevents leakage of unspliced pre-mRNAs from the nucleus (named for pre-mRNA REtention and Splicing). In Saccharomyces, the complex consists of Ist3p, Bud13p, and Pml1p.
0070288	name:Name:ferritin complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds iron and acts as a major iron storage system. Intracellular and extracellular ferritin complexes have different ratios of two types of ferritin monomer, the L (light) chain and H (heavy) chain.
0008043	name:Name:intracellular ferritin complex	info:Definition:A ferritin complex located in the cell. Intracellular ferritin complexes contain 24 subunits, in a mixture of L (light) chains and H (heavy) chains.
0070289	name:Name:extracellular ferritin complex	name:Synonym:serum ferritin complex	info:Definition:A ferritin complex located in the extracellular region. Extracellular ferritin complexes contain L (light) chains but few or no H (heavy) chains.
0070310	name:Name:ATR-ATRIP complex	name:Synonym:Mec1-Lcd1 complex	name:Synonym:Rad3-Rad26 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the protein kinase ATR and ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP) and binds single-stranded DNA; ssDNA binding affinity is increased in the presence of replication protein A.
0070313	name:Name:RGS6-DNMT1-DMAP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of RGS6, a negative regulator of heterotrimeric G protein signaling, with the DMAP1-Dnmt1 transcriptional repressor complex; in the complex, RGS6 inhibits the transcriptional repressor activity of DMAP1.
0070331	name:Name:CD20-Lck-Fyn complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell-surface protein CD20 and the Src family tyrosine kinases Lck and Fyn.
0070332	name:Name:CD20-Lck-Lyn-Fyn complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell-surface protein CD20 and the Src family tyrosine kinases Lck, Lyn and Fyn.
0070333	name:Name:alpha6-beta4 integrin-Shc-Grb2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB4-SHC-GRB2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta4 integrin complex bound to the adaptor proteins Shc and Grb2.
0070334	name:Name:alpha6-beta4 integrin-laminin 5 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB4-LAMA5 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta4 integrin complex bound to laminin 5.
0070353	name:Name:GATA1-TAL1-TCF3-Lmo2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the zinc finger transcription factor GATA1, the LIM domain protein Lmo2 (RBTN2), the basic helix-loop-helix protein TAL1 and its binding partner TCF3. The complex is involved transcriptional regulation in hematopoiesis.
0070354	name:Name:GATA2-TAL1-TCF3-Lmo2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the zinc finger transcription factor GATA2, the LIM domain protein Lmo2 (RBTN2), the basic helix-loop-helix protein TAL1 and its binding partner TCF3. The complex is involved transcriptional regulation in hematopoiesis.
0070357	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-CD47 complex	name:Synonym:ITGB3-ITGAV-CD47 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to CD47 (also known as IAP).
0070385	name:Name:egasyn-beta-glucuronidase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains beta-glucuronidase and the carboxyl esterase egasyn; formation of the complex causes beta-glucuronidase to be retained in the endoplasmic reticulum.
0070390	name:Name:transcription export complex 2	name:Synonym:Sac3-Thp1-Sus1-Cdc31 complex	name:Synonym:TREX-2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that couples SAGA-dependent gene expression to mRNA export at the inner side of the nuclear pore complex (NPC). The TREX-2 complex is tethered to the inner side of the NPC via the nucleoporins Nup1 and Nup60; in S. cerevisiae it contains Sac3p, Thp1p, Sus1p and Cdc31p.
0070418	name:Name:DNA-dependent protein kinase complex	name:Synonym:DNA-dependent protein kinase, DNA-end-binding complex	name:Synonym:DNA-PK complex	name:Synonym:DNA-PK-Ku antigen complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks and, in mammals, V(D)J recombination events. It consists of the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and the DNA end-binding heterodimer Ku.
0070419	name:Name:nonhomologous end joining complex	name:Synonym:NHEJ complex	name:Synonym:non-homologous end joining complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that plays a role in DNA double-strand break repair via nonhomologous end joining. Such complexes typically contain a specialized DNA ligase (e.g. Lig4 in eukaryotes) and one or more proteins that bind to DNA ends.
0005958	name:Name:DNA-dependent protein kinase-DNA ligase 4 complex	info:Definition:A large protein complex which is involved in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks and, in mammals, V(D)J recombination events. It consists of the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), the DNA end-binding heterodimer Ku, the nuclear phosphoprotein XRCC4 or a homolog thereof, and DNA ligase IV.
0070420	name:Name:Ku-DNA ligase complex	info:Definition:A nonhomologous end joining complex that contains one or more Ku monomers and one or more DNA ligase molecules from the LigC or LigD family, and mediates nonhomologous end joining in bacteria.
0070421	name:Name:DNA ligase III-XRCC1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains DNA ligase III and XRCC1, and is involved in base excision repair.
0070422	name:Name:G-protein beta/gamma-Raf-1 complex	name:Synonym:G protein complex (GNG2, GNB2L1, RAF1)	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the serine-threonine protein kinase Raf-1 with the beta and gamma subunits of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0070435	name:Name:Shc-EGFR complex	name:Synonym:Shc-Egfr complex, EGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the adaptor protein Shc, and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070436	name:Name:Grb2-EGFR complex	name:Synonym:Grb2-Egfr complex, EGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Grb2, and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070437	name:Name:Grb2-Shc complex	name:Synonym:Grb2-Shc complex, EGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Grb2 and the adaptor protein Shc, and is involved in linking epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070438	name:Name:mTOR-FKBP12-rapamycin complex	name:Synonym:Fkbp1a-Frap1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) serine/threonine kinase, the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase FKBP12 (FKBP1A) and rapamycin (sirolimus).
0070441	name:Name:G-protein beta/gamma-Btk complex	name:Synonym:G protein complex (BTK, GNG1, GNG2)	name:Synonym:G protein complex (Btk, Gng2, Gnb1)	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the Bruton tyrosine protein kinase Btk, which is implicated in mammalian X-linked immunodeficiencies, with the beta and gamma subunits of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0070450	name:Name:interleukin4-interleukin-4 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL4-IL4 receptor complex	name:Synonym:IL4-IL4R-IL2RG complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is formed by the association of a heterodimeric interleukin-4 receptor complex with an interleukin-4 molecule.
0070464	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-collagen alpha3(VI) complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to the alpha3 chain of type VI collagen; the integrin binds most strongly to unfolded collagen.
0070465	name:Name:alpha1-beta1 integrin-alpha3(VI) complex	name:Synonym:ITGA1-ITGB1-COL6A3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha1-beta1 integrin complex bound to a type VI collagen triple helix containing an alpha3(VI) chain.
0070466	name:Name:alpha2-beta1 integrin-alpha3(VI) complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2-ITGB1-COL6A3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha2-beta1 integrin complex bound to a type VI collagen triple helix containing an alpha3(VI) chain.
0070467	name:Name:RC-1 DNA recombination complex	name:Synonym:DNA recombination complex RC-1	name:Synonym:RC-1 complex (recombination complex 1)	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains DNA ligase III, DNA polymerase epsilon, a 5'-3' exonuclease, and the SMC1 and SMC2 proteins, and is involved in recombinational repair of deletions and gaps in DNA.
0070515	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-talin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-TLN1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to talin.
0070516	name:Name:CAK-ERCC2 complex	name:Synonym:cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase holoenzyme-ERCC2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating kinase (CAK) holoenzyme complex with ERCC2.
0070517	name:Name:DNA replication factor C core complex	name:Synonym:RFC core complex	info:Definition:A protein complex containing three of the five subunits of eukaryotic replication factor C, those corresponding to human p40, p38, and p37.
0070518	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-CD53 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-CD53 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to membrane protein CD53, a member of the tetraspan family.
0070519	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-CD63 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-CD63 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to membrane protein CD63, a member of the tetraspan family.
0070520	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-CD81 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-CD81 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to membrane protein CD81, a member of the tetraspan family.
0070521	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-CD82 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to membrane protein CD82, a member of the tetraspan family.
0070531	name:Name:BRCA1-A complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the BRCA1-BARD1 heterodimer, RAP80/UIMC1, BRCC3/BRCC36, BRE/BRCC45, FAM175A/CCDC98/Abraxas and MERIT40/NBA1, and specifically recognizes and binds K63-linked polyubiquitin chains present on histone H2A and H2AX at DNA damage sites.
0070532	name:Name:BRCA1-B complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the BRCA1-BARD1 heterodimer, BACH1 and TopBP1, and binds to DNA during S phase at DNA damage sites.
0070533	name:Name:BRCA1-C complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the BRCA1-BARD1 heterodimer, CtIP and Mre11/Rad50/NBS1 (M/R/N) complex, and binds to DNA at DNA damage sites. BRCA1-C binding ta damaged DNA is required for DNA damage-induced Chk1 phosphorylation and the G2/M transition checkpoint.
0070545	name:Name:PeBoW complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in coordinating ribosome biogenesis with cell cycle progression. In human, it is composed of Pes1, Bop1, and WDR12; in Saccharomyces the proteins are known as Nop7p, Erb1 and Ytm1 respectively.
0070552	name:Name:BRISC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the FAM175B/ABRO1, BRCC3/BRCC36, BRE/BRCC45 and MERIT40/NBA1 proteins, and specifically cleaves K63-linked polyubiquitin chains.
0070557	name:Name:PCNA-p21 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 bound to PCNA; formation of the complex inhibits DNA replication.
0070558	name:Name:alphaM-beta2 integrin-CD63 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAM-ITGB2-CD63 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaM-beta2 integrin complex bound to membrane protein CD63, a member of the tetraspan family.
0070559	name:Name:lysosomal multienzyme complex	name:Synonym:GALNS-lysosomal hydrolase 1.27 MDa complex	info:Definition:A protein complex found in the lysosome that contains beta-galactosidase, cathepsin A, alpha-neuraminidase and N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase, and is involved in glycosaminoglycan catabolism.
0070618	name:Name:Grb2-Sos complex	name:Synonym:Grb2-mSos1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Grb2 and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos (or an ortholog thereof, such as mSos1), and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070619	name:Name:Shc-Grb2-Sos complex	name:Synonym:Shc-Grb2-mSos1 complex, EGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains Grb2, the adaptor protein Shc and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos (or an ortholog thereof, such as mSos1), and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070620	name:Name:EGFR-Grb2-Sos complex	name:Synonym:Egfr-Grb2-mSos1 complex, EGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), Grb2 and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos (or an ortholog thereof, such as mSos1), and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070621	name:Name:EGFR-Shc-Grb2-Sos complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), Grb2, the adaptor protein SHC and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos (or an ortholog thereof, such as mSos1), and is involved in linking EGFR activation to the p21-Ras pathway.
0070622	name:Name:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosaminephosphotransferase complex	name:Synonym:N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase complex	name:Synonym:UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosaminephosphotransferase activity; the bovine complex contains disulfide-linked homodimers of 166- and 51-kDa subunits and two identical, noncovalently associated 56-kDa subunits.
0070693	name:Name:P-TEFb-cap methyltransferase complex	name:Synonym:Cdk9-Pcm1 complex	name:Synonym:P-TEFb-Pcm1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is formed by the association of positive transcription elongation factor complex b (P-TEFb) with the mRNA capping methyltransferase.
0070695	name:Name:FHF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of AKTIP/FTS, FAM160A2/p107FHIP, and one or more members of the Hook family of proteins, HOOK1, HOOK2, and HOOK3. The complex is thought to promote vesicle trafficking and/or fusion, and associates with the homotypic vesicular sorting complex (the HOPS complex).
0070718	name:Name:alphaPDGFR-SHP-2 complex	name:Synonym:PDGFRA-SHP-2 complex, PDGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the platelet-derived growth factor alpha receptor (alphaPDGFR; PDGFRA) and the adaptor protein SHP-2, and is involved signaling via the PDGFR signaling pathway.
0070719	name:Name:alphaPDGFR-PLC-gamma-1-PI3K-SHP-2 complex	name:Synonym:PDGFRA-PLC-gamma-1-PI3K-SHP-2 complex, PDGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the platelet-derived growth factor alpha receptor (alphaPDGFR; PDGFRA), phospholipase C-gamma-1 (PLC-gamma-1), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and the adaptor protein SHP-2, and is involved signaling via the PDGFR signaling pathway.
0070720	name:Name:Grb2-SHP-2 complex	name:Synonym:GRB2-SHP-2 complex, PDGF stimulated	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the receptor adaptor proteins Grb2 and SHP-2, and is involved signaling via the PDGFR signaling pathway.
0070743	name:Name:interleukin-23 complex	name:Synonym:IL-23 complex	name:Synonym:IL12B	name:Synonym:IL23A	name:Synonym:p19	name:Synonym:p40	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of an interleukin-23 alpha (p19, product of the IL23A gene) and an interleukin-12 beta (p40, product of the IL12B gene) subunit and is secreted into the extracellular space.
0070744	name:Name:interleukin-27 complex	name:Synonym:EBI3	name:Synonym:IL-27 complex	name:Synonym:IL27	name:Synonym:p28	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of an interleukin-27p28 subunit (product of the IL27 gene) and an EBI3 subunit and is secreted into the extracellular space.
0070745	name:Name:interleukin-35 complex	name:Synonym:EBI3	name:Synonym:IL-35 complex	name:Synonym:IL12A	name:Synonym:p35	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of an interleukin-12 alpha subunit (p35, product of the IL12A gene) and an EBI3 subunit and is secreted into the extracellular space.
0070762	name:Name:NDC1 complex	name:Synonym:NDC1 subcomplex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of the nuclear pore complex, and contains three transmembrane nucleoporins, encoded in S. cerevisiae by Ndc1p, Pom152p and Pom34p.
0070763	name:Name:Delta1 complex	name:Synonym:Delta1 homodimer complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of homodimer of the Notch ligand Delta1.
0070764	name:Name:gamma-secretase-Delta1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is formed by the association of the Notch ligand Delta1 with the gamma-secretase complex.
0070765	name:Name:gamma-secretase complex	name:Synonym:CD147-gamma-secretase complex (APH-1a, PS-1, PEN-2, NCT variant)	name:Synonym:gamma-secretase complex (APH1A, PSEN1, PSENEN, NCSTN variant)	name:Synonym:gamma-secretase complex (APH1A, PSEN2, PSENEN, NCSTN)	name:Synonym:gamma-secretase complex (APH1B, PSEN1, PSENEN, NCSTN)	name:Synonym:gamma-secretase complex (APH1B, PSEN2, PSENEN, NCSTN)	info:Definition:A protein complex that has aspartic-type endopeptidase activity, and contains a catalytic subunit, presenilin (PS), that is a prototypical member of the GxGD-type aspartyl peptidases. The complex also contains additional subunits, including nicastrin, APH-1, PEN-2, and a regulatory subunit, CD147. Gamma-secretase cleaves several transmembrane proteins including the cell surface receptor Notch and the beta-amyloid precursor protein.
0070767	name:Name:BRCA1-Rad51 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains BRCA1 and Rad 51, and is involved in the control of recombination and of genome integrity.
0070769	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-CIB complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2B-ITGB3-CIB1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to CIB, a protein that binds calcium as well as the alphaIIb-beta3 integrin.
0070770	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-CD47-FAK complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-CD47-FAK complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface antigen CD47 and the kinase FAK.
0070771	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-CD47-Src complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-CD47-SRC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface antigen CD47 and the kinase c-Src.
0070772	name:Name:PAS complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains a phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate 5-kinase subunit (Fab1p in yeast; PIKfyve in mammals), a kinase activator, and a phosphatase, and may also contain additional proteins; it is involved in regulating the synthesis and turnover of phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate. In mammals the complex is composed of PIKFYVE, FIG4 and VAC14. In yeast it is composed of Atg18p, Fig4p, Fab1p, Vac14p and Vac7p.
0070826	name:Name:paraferritin complex	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic protein complex that contains integrin, mobilferrin and a flavin monooxygenase, is capable of reducing Fe(III) to Fe(II) utilizing NADPH, and is involved in iron transport. Fe(II) is required in the cell as the substrate for ferrochelatase in the synthesis of heme.
0070847	name:Name:core mediator complex	name:Synonym:C mediator complex	name:Synonym:S mediator complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that interacts with the carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II and plays an active role in transducing the signal from a transcription factor to the transcriptional machinery. The core mediator complex has a stimulatory effect on basal transcription, and contains most of the same subdomains as the larger form of mediator complex -- a head domain comprising proteins known in Saccharomyces as Srb2, -4, and -5, Med6, -8, and -11, and Rox3 proteins; a middle domain comprising Med1, -4, and -7, Nut1 and -2, Cse2, Rgr1, Soh1, and Srb7 proteins; and a tail consisting of Gal11p, Med2p, Pgd1p, and Sin4p -- but lacks the regulatory subcomplex comprising Ssn2, -3, and -8, and Srb8 proteins. Metazoan core mediator complexes have similar modular structures and include homologs of yeast Srb and Med proteins.
0070850	name:Name:TACC/TOG complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the transforming acidic coiled coil (TACC) protein and the TOG protein (Mia1p/Alp7p and Alp14, respectively, in fission yeast), and is involved in microtubule array remodeling as cells progress through the cell cycle. The TACC/TOG complex is conserved in eukaryotes, associates with microtubules, and shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm during interphase.
0070876	name:Name:SOSS complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that functions downstream of the MRN complex to promote DNA repair and the G2/M checkpoint. The SOSS complex associates with single-stranded DNA at DNA lesions and is composed of SOSS-B (SOSS-B1/OBFC2B or SOSS-B2/OBFC2A), SOSS-A/INTS3 and SOSS-C/C9orf80.
0070877	name:Name:microprocessor complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds to heme and to pri-miRNAs, and is required for the formation of a pre-microRNA (pre-miRNA), the initial step of microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. The complex is composed of the double-stranded-RNA-specific RNase Drosha (also called RNASEN) and the RNA-binding protein DGCR8 (heme-free or heme-bound forms). Within the complex, DGCR8 function as a molecular anchor necessary for the recognition of pri-miRNA at dsRNA-ssRNA junction and directs RNASEN/Drosha to cleave the 3' and 5' strands of a stem-loop to release hairpin-shaped pre-miRNAs.
0070916	name:Name:inositol phosphoceramide synthase complex	name:Synonym:IPC synthase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses inositol phosphoceramide synthase activity and contains a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit (Aur1p and Kei1p, respectively, in Saccharomyces).
0070937	name:Name:CRD-mediated mRNA stability complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that binds to, and promotes stabilization of, mRNA molecules containing the coding region instability determinant (CRD). In human, IGF2BP1 and at least four additional proteins: HNRNPU, SYNCRIP, YBX1, and DHX9.
0070939	name:Name:Dsl1p complex	info:Definition:A multisubunit tethering complex, i.e. a protein complex involved in mediating the initial interaction between vesicles and the membranes with which they fuse, that is involved in trafficking from the Golgi apparatus to the ER. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae the Dsl1p complex contains Dsl1p, Tip20p, and Sec39p.
0070969	name:Name:ULK1-ATG13-FIP200 complex	name:Synonym:ULK1-ATG13-RB1CC1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is essential for mammalian autophagy, and consists of at least 3 proteins: ULK1, ATG13 and RB1CC1(FIP200). This complex is the mammalian counterpart of Atg1-Atg13-Atg17 in yeast.
0071052	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM1.
0071053	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM2.
0071054	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM3 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM3.
0071055	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM9 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM9 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM9.
0071056	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM15 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM15 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM15.
0071057	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-ADAM15 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-ADAM15 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM15.
0071058	name:Name:alpha3-beta1 integrin-CD151 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA3-ITGB1-CD151 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha3-beta1 integrin complex bound to the tetraspanin CD151.
0071059	name:Name:alpha6-beta1 integrin-CD151 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB1-CD151 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta1 integrin complex bound to the tetraspanin CD151.
0071060	name:Name:alpha7-beta1 integrin-CD151 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA7-ITGB1-CD151 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha7-beta1 integrin complex bound to the tetraspanin CD151.
0071061	name:Name:alpha6-beta4 integrin-CD151 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB4-CD151 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta4 integrin complex bound to the tetraspanin CD151.
0071062	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-vitronectin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-VTN complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to vitronectin.
0071064	name:Name:alphaE-beta7 integrin-E-cadherin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAE-ITGB7-CDH1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaE-beta7 integrin complex bound to E-cadherin.
0071065	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-VCAM1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to vascular cell adhesion molecule-1.
0071067	name:Name:alphav-beta3 integrin-ADAM23 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-ADAM23 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphav-beta3 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM23.
0071068	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM12 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM12 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM12.
0071069	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-thrombospondin-1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-THBS1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to thrombospondin-1.
0071070	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-thrombospondin-2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-THBS2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to thrombospondin-2.
0071075	name:Name:CUGBP1-eIF2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 complex (EIF2), CUG binding protein 1, and several endoplasmic reticulum proteins; the complex is involved in the regulation of translation.
0071078	name:Name:fibronectin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:FN-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of fibronectin bound to tissue transglutaminase, and is involved in cell adhesion.
0071079	name:Name:alpha2-beta1 integrin-chondroadherin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2-ITGB1-CHAD complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha2-beta1 integrin complex bound to the cartilage matrix protein chondroadherin.
0071080	name:Name:alpha3-beta1 integrin-basigin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA3-ITGB1-BSG complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha3-beta1 integrin complex bound to the cell surface protein basigin.
0071081	name:Name:alpha3-beta1 integrin-CD63 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA3-ITGB1-CD63 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha3-beta1 integrin complex bound to the tetraspanin CD63.
0071082	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-tenascin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-TNC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the extracellular matrix protein tenascin.
0071083	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-CD47-FCER2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-CD447-FCER2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface protein CD47 and the low-affinity immunoglobulin epsilon Fc receptor (FCER2).
0071084	name:Name:alpha2-beta1 integrin-CD47 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2-ITGB1-CD47 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha2-beta1 integrin complex bound to the cell surface protein CD47.
0071085	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-CD9 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-CD9 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface protein CD9.
0071086	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-CD9-CD47-platelet glycoprotein Ib complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-CD9-GP1b-CD47 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface proteins CD9 and CD47, and the heterodimeric platelet glycoprotein Ib.
0071087	name:Name:alpha11-beta1 integrin-collagen type I complex	name:Synonym:ITGA11-ITGB1-COL1A1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha11-beta1 integrin complex bound to a type I collagen.
0071088	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to tissue transglutaminase.
0071089	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to tissue transglutaminase.
0071090	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-fibronectin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA2b-ITGB3-FN1-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to fibronectin and tissue transglutaminase.
0071091	name:Name:alpha1-beta1 integrin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA1-ITGB1-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha1-beta1 integrin complex bound to tissue transglutaminase.
0071092	name:Name:alpha3-beta1 integrin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA3-ITGB1-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha3-beta1 integrin complex bound to tissue transglutaminase.
0071093	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-fibronectin-tissue transglutaminase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-FN1-TGM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to fibronectin and tissue transglutaminase.
0071094	name:Name:alpha6-beta4 integrin-CD9 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB4-CD9 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta4 integrin complex bound to the cell surface protein CD9.
0071095	name:Name:alpha3-beta1 integrin-thrombospondin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA3-ITGB1-THBS1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha3-beta1 integrin complex bound to thrombospondin.
0071096	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-gelsolin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-Gsn complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to gelsolin.
0071097	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-paxillin-Pyk2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-PXN-PTK2b complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to paxillin and the FAK-related kinase Pyk2.
0071098	name:Name:alpha6-beta4 integrin-Fyn complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB4-FYN complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta4 integrin complex bound to the Src family tyrosine kinase Fyn.
0071099	name:Name:alphaV-beta6 integrin-TGFbeta-3 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB6-TFGB3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta6 integrin complex bound to transforming growth factor beta-3 (TGFbeta-3).
0071100	name:Name:alphaV-beta8 integrin-MMP14-TGFbeta-1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB8-MMP14-TGFB1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta8 integrin complex bound to matrix metalloproteinase 14 and transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFbeta-1).
0071101	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-JAM2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-JAM2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to the cell adhesion molecule JAM2.
0071102	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-paxillin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-PXN complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to paxillin.
0071112	name:Name:alpha4-beta4 integrin-EMILIN-1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB4-EMILIN1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta4 integrin complex bound to EMILIN-1 (ElastinMicrofibril Interface Located ProteIN).
0071113	name:Name:alphaIIb-beta3 integrin-ICAM-4 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAIIb-ITGB3-ICAM4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaIIb-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell adhesion molecule ICAM-4.
0071114	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-tumstatin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-COL4A3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to tumstatin, the NC1 domain of the alpha3 chain of type IV collagen.
0071115	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-endostatin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-CAL4A3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to endostatin, the NC1 domain of the alpha1 chain of type XVIII collagen.
0071116	name:Name:alpha6-beta1 integrin-CYR61 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA6-ITGB1-CYR61 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha6-beta1 integrin complex bound to CYR61, a cysteine-rich protein involved in angiogenesis.
0071117	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-fibronectin-NOV complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-FN-1-NOV complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to fibronectin and the extracellular matrix protein NOV.
0071118	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-NOV complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-FN-1-NOV complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to the extracellular matrix protein NOV.
0071119	name:Name:alpha7-beta1 integrin-nicotinamide riboside kinase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA7-ITGB1-ITGB1BP3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha7-beta1 integrin complex bound to nicotinamide riboside kinase 2 (also known as muscle integrin binding protein, MIBP).
0071120	name:Name:alpha4-beta1 integrin-CD47 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA4-ITGB1-CB47 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha4-beta1 integrin complex bound to the cell surface antigen CD47.
0071121	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-VEGF-D complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-FIGF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to vascular endothelial growth factor D.
0071122	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-VEGF-A complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-VEGFA complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to vascular endothelial growth factor A.
0071123	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-VEGF-C complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-VEGFC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to vascular endothelial growth factor C.
0071124	name:Name:alpha1-beta1 integrin-tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA1-ITGB1-PTPN2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha1-beta1 integrin complex bound to tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 2.
0071125	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-EGFR complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-EGFR complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to epidermal growth factor receptor.
0071126	name:Name:alphaV-beta6 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB6-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta6 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0071127	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0071128	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-osteopontin complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-SPP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to osteopontin.
0071129	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-LPP3 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-PPAP2B complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase-3.
0071130	name:Name:alpha5-beta1 integrin-LPP3 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB1-PPAP2B complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta1 integrin complex bound to lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase-3.
0071131	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-laminin alpha-4 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-LAMA4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to laminin alpha-4.
0071132	name:Name:alphaX-beta2 integrin-ICAM-4 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAX-ITGB2-ICAM4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaX-beta2 integrin complex bound to intercellular adhesion molecule 4.
0071133	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-ADAM8 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-ADAM8 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to the transmembrane metallopeptidase ADAM8.
0071134	name:Name:alpha9-beta1 integrin-thrombospondin-1 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA9-ITGB1-THBS1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha9-beta1 integrin complex bound to thrombospondin-1.
0071135	name:Name:alpha7-beta1 integrin-focal adhesion kinase complex	name:Synonym:ITGA7-ITGB1-PTK2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha7-beta1 integrin complex bound to focal adhesion kinase.
0071136	name:Name:alpha7-beta1 integrin-laminin alpha-2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA7-ITGB1-LAMA2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha7-beta1 integrin complex bound to laminin alpha-2.
0071137	name:Name:alphaV-beta3 integrin-CD98 complex	name:Synonym:ITGAV-ITGB3-SLC3A2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alphaV-beta3 integrin complex bound to the cell surface antigen CD98.
0071138	name:Name:alpha5-beta5-fibronectin-SFRP2 complex	name:Synonym:ITGA5-ITGB5-FN-1-SFRP2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of an alpha5-beta5 integrin complex bound to fibronectin and secreted frizzled-related protein 2.
0071141	name:Name:SMAD protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of SMAD proteins; may be homomeric or heteromeric.
0071142	name:Name:SMAD2 protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD2 homotrimer complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a SMAD2 homotrimer.
0071143	name:Name:SMAD3 protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD3 homotrimer complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a SMAD3 homotrimer.
0071144	name:Name:SMAD2-SMAD3 protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD2-SMAD3 complex	info:Definition:A heteromeric SMAD protein complex that contains SMAD2 and SMAD3.
0071145	name:Name:SMAD2-SMAD4 protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD2-SMAD4 heteromer complex	info:Definition:A heteromeric SMAD protein complex that contains SMAD2 and SMAD4.
0071146	name:Name:SMAD3-SMAD4 protein complex	name:Synonym:SMAD3-SMAD4 complex	info:Definition:A heteromeric SMAD protein complex that contains SMAD3 and SMAD4.
0071147	name:Name:TEAD-2 multiprotein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the DNA binding protein TEAD-2 bound to 12 other polypeptides including the transcriptional coactivator YAP, the multi-PDZ domain protein MPDZ (also called MUPP1), a 14-3-3 domain protein, and others.
0071152	name:Name:G-protein alpha(q)-synembrin complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G(q) alpha subunit complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor synembrin with the alpha(q) subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0071153	name:Name:G-protein alpha(o)-synembrin complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G(o) alpha-1 subunit complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G(o) alpha-2 subunit complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor synembrin with the alpha(o) subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0071154	name:Name:G-protein alpha(i)1-synembrin complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G(i) alpha-1 subunit complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G(i) alpha-2 subunit complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor synembrin with the alpha(i)1 subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0071155	name:Name:G-protein alpha(13)-synembrin complex	name:Synonym:Ric-8A G alpha 13 subunit complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor synembrin with the alpha(13) subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein.
0071159	name:Name:NF-kappaB complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of a homo- or heterodimer of members of a family of structurally related proteins that contain a conserved N-terminal region called the Rel homology domain (RHD). In the nucleus, NF-kappaB complexes act as transcription factors. In unstimulated cells, NF-kappaB dimers are sequestered in the cytoplasm by IkappaB monomers; signals that induce NF-kappaB activity cause degradation of IkappaB, allowing NF-kappaB dimers to translocate to the nucleus and induce gene expression.
0035525	name:Name:NF-kappaB p50/p65 complex	name:Synonym:NF-kappa B1/p65 complex	name:Synonym:NF-kappa B1/RelA complex	name:Synonym:NF-kappa p105/p65 complex	name:Synonym:NF-kappa p105/RelA complex	name:Synonym:NF-kappa p50/RelA complex	info:Definition:A heterodimer of NF-kappa B p50 and p65 subunits.
0071162	name:Name:CMG complex	name:Synonym:unwindosome	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the GINS complex, Cdc45p, and the heterohexameric MCM complex, and that is involved in unwinding DNA during replication.
0071175	name:Name:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-ICN1 complex	name:Synonym:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-Notch1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch1 (ICN1), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-2 (MAML2); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071176	name:Name:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-ICN2 complex	name:Synonym:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-Notch2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch2 (ICN2), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-2 (MAML2); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071177	name:Name:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-ICN3 complex	name:Synonym:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-Notch3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch3 (ICN3), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-2 (MAML2); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071178	name:Name:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-ICN4 complex	name:Synonym:MAML2-RBP-Jkappa-Notch4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch4 (ICN4), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-2 (MAML2); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071179	name:Name:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-ICN1 complex	name:Synonym:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-Notch1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch1 (ICN1), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-3 (MAML3); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071180	name:Name:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-ICN2 complex	name:Synonym:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-Notch2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch2 (ICN2), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-3 (MAML3); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071181	name:Name:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-ICN3 complex	name:Synonym:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-Notch3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch3 (ICN3), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-3 (MAML3); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071182	name:Name:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-ICN4 complex	name:Synonym:MAML3-RBP-Jkappa-Notch4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of the intracellular domain of Notch4 (ICN4), the DNA-binding transcription factor RBP-Jkappa, and the transcriptional coactivator Mastermind-like-3 (MAML3); the complex is involved in transcriptional activation in response to Notch-mediated signaling.
0071183	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-protocadherin-gamma complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains two cell adhesion molecules, a protocadherin-alpha and a protocadherin-gamma, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071184	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v4-protocadherin-gamma-a1 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdhga1-Pcdha4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v4 and protocadherin-gamma-a1, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071185	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v4-protocadherin-gamma-a3 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdhga1-Pcdhga3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v4 and protocadherin-gamma-a3, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071186	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v4-protocadherin-gamma-b2 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdhga1-Pcdhgb2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v4 and protocadherin-gamma-b2, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071187	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v4-protocadherin-gamma-b4 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdhga1-Pcdhgb4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v4 and protocadherin-gamma-b4, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071188	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v7-protocadherin-gamma-a1 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdha7-Pcdhga1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v7 and protocadherin-gamma-a1, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071189	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v7-protocadherin-gamma-a3 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdha7-Pcdhga3 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v7 and protocadherin-gamma-a3, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071190	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v7-protocadherin-gamma-b2 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdha7-Pcdhgb4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v7 and protocadherin-gamma-b2, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071191	name:Name:protocadherin-alpha-v7-protocadherin-gamma-b4 complex	name:Synonym:Pcdha7-Pcdhgb2 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the cell adhesion molecules protocadherin-alpha-v7 and protocadherin-gamma-b4, and is involved in the regulation of protein localization to the plasma membrane.
0071203	name:Name:WASH complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that localizes at the surface of endosomes, where it recruits and activates the Arp2/3 complex to induce actin polymerization. In human, the WASH complex is composed of F-actin-capping protein subunits alpha and beta, WASH1, FAM21, KIAA1033, KIAA0196 and CCDC53.
0071256	name:Name:translocon complex	name:Synonym:Sec complex-associated translocon complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that constitutes a specific site of protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum, which involves the signal recognition particle receptor. The complex contains a core heterotrimer of alpha, beta and gamma subunits, and may contain additional proteins.
0005784	name:Name:Sec61 translocon complex	name:Synonym:Sec61p-Sbh1p-Sss1p complex	info:Definition:A translocon complex that contains a core heterotrimer of conserved alpha, beta and gamma subunits, and may contain additional proteins (translocon-associated proteins or TRAPs); in budding yeast the core proteins are Sec61p, Sbh1p, and Sss1p. The Sec61 translocon complex functions in cotranslational and posttranslational translocation events.
0071261	name:Name:Ssh1 translocon complex	name:Synonym:Ssh1p-Sss1p-Sbh2p complex	info:Definition:A translocon complex that contains a core heterotrimer of alpha, beta and gamma subunits, and may contain additional proteins (translocon-associated proteins or TRAPs); in budding yeast the core proteins are Ssh1p, Sbh2p, and Sss1p. The Ssh1 translocon complex is involved in the cotranslational pathway of protein transport across the ER membrane, and recognizes proteins bearing strongly hydrophobic signal sequences.
0071341	name:Name:medial cortical node	name:Synonym:mid1p medial cortical dot	name:Synonym:midsome	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the mid1, cdr2, wee1, klp8, and blt1 proteins, and is involved in contractile ring localization. Medial cortical node complexes appear as cortical dots in the middle of the cell during interphase, and function to recruit other ring components in early mitosis.
0071439	name:Name:clathrin complex	name:Synonym:clathrin triskelion	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of three clathrin heavy chains and three clathrin light chains, organized into a symmetrical three-legged structure called a triskelion. In clathrin-coated vesicles clathrin is the main component of the coat and forms a polymeric mechanical scaffold on the vesicle surface.
0071513	name:Name:phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes decarboxylation of 4'-phosphopantothenoylcysteine to yield 4'-phosphopantetheine; this is the third step in the biosynthesis of Coenzyme A. The complex is homotrimeric in many eukaryotes, but is a heterotrimer in Saccharomyces.
0071521	name:Name:Cdc42 GTPase complex	name:Synonym:Ras1-Scd1-Scd2-Cdc42-Shk1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex formed by the association of the small GTPase Cdc42 with additional proteins. In Schizosaccharomyces the complex contains the Cdc42, Ras1, Scd1, Scd2, andShk1 proteins, and functions in the Ras1-Scd GTPase signalling pathway.
0071563	name:Name:Myo2p-Vac17p-Vac8p transport complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in transport of vacuoles to a newly formed daughter cell. In yeast, this complex is composed of Myo2p, Vac17p, and Vac8p.
0071664	name:Name:catenin-TCF7L2 complex	name:Synonym:catenin-TCF4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains a catenin and TCF7L2 (TCF4), binds to the TCF DNA motif within a promoter element, and is involved in the regulation of WNT target gene transcription.
0070369	name:Name:beta-catenin-TCF7L2 complex	name:Synonym:beta-catenin-TCF4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains beta-catenin and TCF7L2 (TCF4), binds to the TCF DNA motif within a promoter element, and is involved in the regulation of WNT target gene transcription.
0071665	name:Name:gamma-catenin-TCF7L2 complex	name:Synonym:gamma-catenin-TCF4 complex	name:Synonym:plakoglobin-TCF4 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains gamma-catenin and TCF7L2 (TCF4), binds to the TCF DNA motif within a promoter element, and is involved in the regulation of WNT target gene transcription.
0071817	name:Name:MMXD complex	name:Synonym:MMS19-MIP18-XPD complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains the proteins MMS19, MIP18 and XPD, localizes to mitotic spindle during mitosis, and is required for proper chromosome segregation.
0071819	name:Name:DUBm complex	name:Synonym:deubiquitinating module	name:Synonym:deubiquitination module	name:Synonym:SAGA DUBm complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms part of SAGA-type complexes SAGA and SLIK, and mediates deubiquitination of histone H2B. In S. cerevisiae, the DUBm consists of the proteins Ubp8p, Sgf11p, Sus1p, and Sgf73p.
0071821	name:Name:FANCM-MHF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex contains the proteins FANCM and MHF, or their orthologs, plays an essential role in DNA remodeling, protects replication forks, and is conserved in eukaryotes.
0071986	name:Name:Ragulator complex	name:Synonym:MAPKSP1/ROBLD3/C11orf59 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that contains MAPKSP1 (MP1, Map2k1ip1), ROBLD3 (p14, Mapbpip), and C11orf59 (p18). The complex is anchored to lipid rafts in late endosome membranes via C11orf59, recruits mTORC1 to lysosomal membranes in amino acid signaling to mTORC1, and is also involved in ERK/MAPK signaling.
0072379	name:Name:ER membrane insertion complex	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum membrane insertion complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is involved in the post-translational delivery of tail-anchored (TA) membrane proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum. TA membrane proteins, also called type II transmembrane proteins, contain a single C-terminal transmembrane region. Some ER membrane insertion complex subunits are conserved between different species such as mammals and budding yeast.
0071818	name:Name:BAT3 complex	info:Definition:An ER membrane insertion complex that acts by facilitating tail-anchored protein capture by ASNA1/TRC40. In mammals the complex contains Bat3, TRC35 and Ubl4A.
0072380	name:Name:TRC complex	name:Synonym:TMD recognition complex	info:Definition:An ER membrane insertion complex that contains subunits that recognize two types of transmembrane domain signals. In budding yeast the complex contains Get4p, Get5p, Sgt2p, and at least two heat shock proteins (HSPs).
0072546	name:Name:ER membrane protein complex	name:Synonym:EMC	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein complex	info:Definition:A transmembrane protein complex that is involved in protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. In S. cerevisiae, it has six members: EMC1, EMC2, AIM27, EMC4, KRE27, and EMC6.
0072557	name:Name:IPAF inflammasome complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of four components, NALP1, PYCARD (ASC)(27), caspase-1 and caspase-5, and includes among its functions that of being the primary mediator of susceptibility to anthrax lethal toxin.
0072558	name:Name:NALP1 inflammasome complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of three components, NALP3, PYCARD and caspase-1, and includes among its functions the sensing of various stimuli including anti-viral compounds R837 and R848, bacterial mRNA, gout-associated crystals, bacterial toxins derived from Listeria monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus and Shigella flexneri.
0072559	name:Name:NALP3 inflammasome complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of three components, IPAF, NAIP and caspase-1, and includes among its functions the sensing of flagellin derived from Legionella pneumophila, Salmonella typhimurium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Shigella flexneri.
0072669	name:Name:tRNA-splicing ligase complex	name:Synonym:tRNA splicing ligase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that catalyzes the ligation of cleaved pre-tRNAs by directly joining spliced tRNA halves to mature-sized tRNAs by incorporating the precursor-derived splice junction phosphate into the mature tRNA as a canonical 3',5'-phosphodiester.
0097025	name:Name:MPP7-DLG1-LIN7 complex	info:Definition:A heterotrimeric protein complex formed by the association of MMP7, DLG1 and either LIN7A or LIN7C; regulates the stability and localization of DLG1 to cell junctions.
0097057	name:Name:TRAF2-GSTP1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex comprising tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1). This complex is thought to disrupt the TNF signaling cascade, thus down-regulating inflammatory responses.
0097058	name:Name:CRLF-CLCF1 complex	name:Synonym:CLF-CLC complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex that is composed of cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (product of the CLCF1 gene) and cytokine receptor-like factor 1 (product of the CRLF gene) and is secreted into the extracellular space. The CRLF-CLCF1 complex is a ligand for the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) receptor complex.
0097059	name:Name:CNTFR-CLCF1 complex	name:Synonym:sCNTFR-CLC complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that is composed of two soluble ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor alpha subunits (product of the CNTFR gene) and two molecules of cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (product of the CLCF1 gene). The complex is secreted into the extracellular space.
0097071	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor complex	name:Synonym:IRF complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of two interferon regulatory proteins (IRFs); may be homodimeric or heterodimeric. The activation of a latent closed conformation of IRF in the cytoplasm is triggered by phosphorylation of Ser/Thr residues in a C-terminal region. Phosphorylation stimulates the C-terminal autoinhibitory domain to attain a highly extended conformation triggering dimerization through extensive contacts to a second subunit.
0097072	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor 3 complex	name:Synonym:IRF3:IRF3 complex	info:Definition:An interferon regulatory factor complex that consists of a homodimer of interferon regulatory factor 3.
0097073	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor 5 complex	name:Synonym:IRF5:IRF5 complex	info:Definition:An interferon regulatory factor complex that consists of a homodimer of interferon regulatory factor 5.
0097074	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor 7 complex	name:Synonym:IRF7:IRF7 complex	info:Definition:An interferon regulatory factor complex that consists of a homodimer of interferon regulatory factor 7.
0097075	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor 3-interferon regulatory factor 7 complex	name:Synonym:IRF3:IRF7 complex	info:Definition:An interferon regulatory factor complex that consists of a heterodimer of interferon regulatory factor 3 and interferon regulatory factor 7.
0097085	name:Name:interferon regulatory factor 3-interferon regulatory factor 5 complex	name:Synonym:IRF3:IRF5 complex	info:Definition:An interferon regulatory factor complex that consists of a heterodimer of interferon regulatory factor 3 and interferon regulatory factor 5.
0097076	name:Name:transforming growth factor beta activated kinase 1 complex	name:Synonym:TAK1 kinase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that possesses protein kinase activity and activates the I-kappa B kinase complex (IKK) and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases in response to TRAF6 signaling. It comprises the catalytic subunit TAK1 complexed to the regulatory subunits, termed TABs (TAK1-binding subunits).
0097078	name:Name:FAl1-SGD1 complex	info:Definition:A protein complex involved in the 18S rRNA biogenesis. In S. cerevisiae this complex consists of Fal1p and Sgd1p and in humans this complex consists of NOM1 and eIF4AIII subunits.
0097136	name:Name:Bcl-2 family protein complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that consists of members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators. Bcl-2 proteins respond to cues from various forms of intracellular stress, such as DNA damage or cytokine deprivation, and interact with opposing family members to determine whether or not the caspase proteolytic cascade should be unleashed.
0097137	name:Name:BAD-BCL-xl complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of BAD and BCL-xl, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097138	name:Name:BAD-BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of BAD and BCL-2, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097139	name:Name:BID-BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of BID and BCL-2, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097140	name:Name:BIM-BCL-xl complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of BIM and BCL-xl, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097141	name:Name:BIM-BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of BIM and BCL-2, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097142	name:Name:PUMA-BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of PUMA and BCL-2, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097143	name:Name:PUMA-BCL-xl complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of PUMA and BCL-xl, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097144	name:Name:BAX complex	info:Definition:An oligomeric protein complex consisting of BAX, a member of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097145	name:Name:BAK complex	info:Definition:An oligomeric protein complex consisting of BAK, a member of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097146	name:Name:NOXA-BCL-xl complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of NOXA and BCL-xl, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097147	name:Name:NOXA-BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A heterodimeric protein complex consisting of NOXA and BCL-2, members of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097148	name:Name:BCL-2 complex	info:Definition:A homodimeric protein complex consisting of BAK, a member of the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators.
0097149	name:Name:centralspindlin complex	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric protein complex playing a key role in the formation of the central spindle in mitosis. Made up of two molecules each of a mitotic kinesin (ZEN-4 in Caenorhabditis elegans or MKLP1 in mammals) and of two molecules each of a GTPase activating protein (GAP) factor (CYK-4 in Caenorhabditis elegans or MgcRacGAP in mammals).
0046536	name:Name:dosage compensation complex	info:Definition:A protein or protein-RNA complex that localizes to one or more of the sex chromosome(s), where it acts to normalize transcription between different sexes.
0070864	name:Name:sperm individualization complex	info:Definition:A macromolecular complex that cytoskeletal components and part of the cell membrane, forms at the nuclear end of a male germline syncytium, or cyst, and translocates the over the length of the syncytium in the course of sperm individualization. Each complex contains an array of 64 investment cones, one per nucleus, that move synchronously along the spermatogenic cyst.
0043226	name:Name:organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function. Includes the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, vesicles, ribosomes and the cytoskeleton, and prokaryotic structures such as anammoxosomes and pirellulosomes. Excludes the plasma membrane.
0031982	name:Name:vesicle	info:Definition:Any small, fluid-filled, spherical organelle enclosed by membrane or protein.
0031410	name:Name:cytoplasmic vesicle	info:Definition:A vesicle formed of membrane or protein, found in the cytoplasm of a cell.
0016023	name:Name:cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicle	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic membrane bounded vesicle	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic membrane-enclosed vesicle	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded vesicle found in the cytoplasm of the cell.
0031411	name:Name:gas vesicle	info:Definition:A hollow structure made of protein, which usually has the form of a cylindrical tube closed by conical end caps. By regulating their relative gas vesicle content aquatic microbes are able to perform vertical migrations.
0043702	name:Name:carotenoid vesicle	info:Definition:A tissue-specific cytoplasmic vesicle surrounded by a membrane half-leaflet within which carotenoid pigments are stored. Carotenoid vescicles are synthesized in xanthophores and erythrophore cells and are yellow, orange or red in appearance.
0031988	name:Name:membrane-bounded vesicle	name:Synonym:membrane-enclosed vesicle	info:Definition:Any small, fluid-filled, spherical organelle enclosed by a lipid bilayer.
0070062	name:Name:extracellular vesicular exosome	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded vesicle that is released into the extracellular region by fusion of the limiting endosomal membrane of a multivesicular body with the plasma membrane.
0071914	name:Name:prominosome	name:Synonym:prominin-containing extracellular membrane vesicle	info:Definition:An extracellular membrane-bounded vesicle that contains prominin proteins (in mouse Prom1/CD33 or Prom2) and are found in body fluids including ventricular fluid, saliva, urine and seminal fluid. In the ventricular fluid of the developing mouse brain two major classes of these particles have been observed (P2 particles of 500-1000 nm and P4 particles of 50-80 nm) which likely originate from microvilli, primary cilia and/or the midbody of neuroepithelial cells. The physiological role is not known.
0046816	name:Name:virion transport vesicle	info:Definition:A vesicle used to transport the partial or complete virion between cellular compartments.
0043227	name:Name:membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, bounded by a single or double lipid bilayer membrane. Includes the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, and vesicles. Excludes the plasma membrane.
0043231	name:Name:intracellular membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:intracellular membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, bounded by a single or double lipid bilayer membrane and occurring within the cell. Includes the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, and vesicles. Excludes the plasma membrane.
0005634	name:Name:nucleus	name:Synonym:cell nucleus	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded organelle of eukaryotic cells in which chromosomes are housed and replicated. In most cells, the nucleus contains all of the cell's chromosomes except the organellar chromosomes, and is the site of RNA synthesis and processing. In some species, or in specialized cell types, RNA metabolism or DNA replication may be absent.
0005739	name:Name:mitochondrion	name:Synonym:mitochondria	info:Definition:A semiautonomous, self replicating organelle that occurs in varying numbers, shapes, and sizes in the cytoplasm of virtually all eukaryotic cells. It is notably the site of tissue respiration.
0005768	name:Name:endosome	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded organelle to which materials ingested by endocytosis are delivered.
0005773	name:Name:vacuole	name:Synonym:vacuolar carboxypeptidase Y	info:Definition:A closed structure, found only in eukaryotic cells, that is completely surrounded by unit membrane and contains liquid material. Cells contain one or several vacuoles, that may have different functions from each other. Vacuoles have a diverse array of functions. They can act as a storage organelle for nutrients or waste products, as a degradative compartment, as a cost-effective way of increasing cell size, and as a homeostatic regulator controlling both turgor pressure and pH of the cytosol.
0005783	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:ER	info:Definition:The irregular network of unit membranes, visible only by electron microscopy, that occurs in the cytoplasm of many eukaryotic cells. The membranes form a complex meshwork of tubular channels, which are often expanded into slitlike cavities called cisternae. The ER takes two forms, rough (or granular), with ribosomes adhering to the outer surface, and smooth (with no ribosomes attached).
0005793	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment	name:Synonym:ER-Golgi intermediate compartment	name:Synonym:ERGIC	name:Synonym:pre-Golgi intermediate compartment	name:Synonym:vesicular-tubular cluster	info:Definition:A complex system of membrane-bounded compartments located between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi complex, with a distinctive membrane protein composition; involved in ER-to-Golgi transport.
0005794	name:Name:Golgi apparatus	name:Synonym:Golgi	name:Synonym:Golgi complex	name:Synonym:Golgi ribbon	info:Definition:A compound membranous cytoplasmic organelle of eukaryotic cells, consisting of flattened, ribosome-free vesicles arranged in a more or less regular stack. The Golgi apparatus differs from the endoplasmic reticulum in often having slightly thicker membranes, appearing in sections as a characteristic shallow semicircle so that the convex side (cis or entry face) abuts the endoplasmic reticulum, secretory vesicles emerging from the concave side (trans or exit face). In vertebrate cells there is usually one such organelle, while in invertebrates and plants, where they are known usually as dictyosomes, there may be several scattered in the cytoplasm. The Golgi apparatus processes proteins produced on the ribosomes of the rough endoplasmic reticulum; such processing includes modification of the core oligosaccharides of glycoproteins, and the sorting and packaging of proteins for transport to a variety of cellular locations. Three different regions of the Golgi are now recognized both in terms of structure and function: cis, in the vicinity of the cis face, trans, in the vicinity of the trans face, and medial, lying between the cis and trans regions.
0009434	name:Name:microtubule-based flagellum	info:Definition:A long, whiplike protrusion from the surface of a eukaryotic cell, whose undulations drive the cell through a liquid medium; similar in structure to a cilium. The flagellum is based on a 9+2 arrangement of microtubules.
0009536	name:Name:plastid	info:Definition:Any member of a family of organelles found in the cytoplasm of plants and some protists, which are membrane-bounded and contain DNA. Plant plastids develop from a common type, the proplastid.
0010168	name:Name:ER body	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum body	info:Definition:A novel compartment found in plant cells that is derived from the ER. The structures have a characteristic shape and size (10 mm long and 0.5 mm wide) and are surrounded with ribosomes. They have been found in Arabidopsis thaliana and related Brassicaceae species.
0012511	name:Name:monolayer-surrounded lipid storage body	name:Synonym:oil body	name:Synonym:oilbody	name:Synonym:oleosome	name:Synonym:spherosome	info:Definition:A subcellular organelle of plant cells surrounded by 'half-unit' or a monolayer membrane instead of the more usual bilayer. The storage body has a droplet of triglyceride surrounded by a monolayer of phospholipids, interacting with the triglycerides and the hydrophilic head groups facing the cytosol, and containing major protein components called oleosins.
0020009	name:Name:microneme	name:Synonym:sarconeme	info:Definition:A small, elongated secretory organelle that forms part of the apical complex, located along the main axis of an apicomplexan parasite cell within the extreme apical region and at the periphery under the inner membrane complex. Of the specialized secretory compartments identified in apicomplexans, micronemes discharge their contents first, during initial contact of the parasite's apical pole with the host cell surface. Micronemal proteins function during parasite attachment and penetration into the target cell.
0020022	name:Name:acidocalcisome	name:Synonym:metachromatic granule	name:Synonym:polyphosphate vacuole	name:Synonym:volutin granule	info:Definition:An electron-dense acidic membrane-bounded organelle which contains a matrix of pyrophosphate and polyphosphates with bound calcium and other cations.
0031094	name:Name:platelet dense tubular network	info:Definition:A network of membrane-bounded compartments found in blood platelets, where they regulate platelet activation by sequestering or releasing calcium. The dense tubular network exists as thin elongated membranes in resting platelets, and undergoes a major ultrastructural change, to a rounded vesicular form, upon addition of thrombin.
0032047	name:Name:mitosome	name:Synonym:crypton	info:Definition:A double-membrane-bounded organelle that functions in iron-sulfur protein maturation; evolutionarily derived from mitochondria.
0033009	name:Name:nucleomorph	info:Definition:A small, vestigial nucleus found in some plastids that derive from a eukaryotic endosymbiont. Observed in chlorarachniophytes and cryptomonads, which acquired their plastids from a green and red alga respectively.
0033099	name:Name:attachment organelle	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded extension of the cell, originally characterized in Mycoplasma species, that contains an electron-dense core that is part of the cytoskeleton and is oriented lengthwise and ends distally in a bulbous knob (terminal button). Required for adherence to host cells and involved in gliding motility and cell division.
0042566	name:Name:hydrogenosome	info:Definition:A spherical, membrane-bounded organelle found in some anaerobic protozoa, which participates in ATP and molecular hydrogen formation.
0042579	name:Name:microbody	info:Definition:Cytoplasmic organelles, spherical or oval in shape, that are bounded by a single membrane and contain oxidative enzymes, especially those utilizing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
0042735	name:Name:protein body	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded plant organelle found in the developing endosperm, contains storage proteins.
0044222	name:Name:anammoxosome	info:Definition:An intracytoplasmic membrane-bounded compartment in anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) bacteria, is the site of anammox catabolism.
0044223	name:Name:pirellulosome	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic structure found in bacterial phyla Planctomycetes and Verrucomicrobia containing a condensed nucleoid and ribosomes and surrounded by an intracytoplasmic membrane. It is surrounded by ribosome-free cytoplasm, in a compartment called the paryphoplasm.
0044227	name:Name:methane-oxidizing organelle	name:Synonym:methane-oxidizing compartment	name:Synonym:methanotroph intracytoplasmic membrane-bound compartment	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic, membrane-bounded compartment found within Methanotrophic bacteria that contains enzymes and electron transfer proteins for methane catabolism. This structure is analogous to the thylakoid of Cyanobacteria and the anammoxosome of anaerobic ammonium oxidation organisms.
0044311	name:Name:exoneme	info:Definition:A dense granule-like organelle of the apical complex of merozoites, released into the parasitophorous vacuole, mediating protease-dependent rupture and parasite exit from the infected erythrocyte.
0070074	name:Name:mononeme	info:Definition:A secretory organelle that forms part of the apical complex; a small, threadlike structure located is close proximity to the subpellicular microtubules. Its contents include a rhomboid protease (PfROM1 in Plasmodium falciparum) that moves from the lateral asymmetric localization to the merozoite apical pole and the posterior pole upon release of merozoites from schizonts.
0070088	name:Name:PHA granule	name:Synonym:PHB granule	name:Synonym:polyhydroxyalkanoate granule	info:Definition:An inclusion body located in the cytoplasm that consists of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) molecules and associated proteins, surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer; the proteins include PHA synthase, PHA depolymerase and 3HB-oligomer hydroxylase, phasins (PhaPs), which are thought to be the major structural proteins of the membrane surrounding the inclusion, and the regulator of phasin expression PhaR.
0071212	name:Name:subsynaptic reticulum	name:Synonym:SSR	info:Definition:An elaborate tubulolamellar membrane system that underlies the postsynaptic cell membrane.
0072516	name:Name:viral assembly compartment	name:Synonym:viral assembly site	name:Synonym:virion assembly compartment	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded compartment that forms in the cytoplasm of virus-infected cells, in which virus assembly takes place.
0065010	name:Name:extracellular membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:extracellular membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, bounded by a lipid bilayer membrane and occurring outside the cell.
0020003	name:Name:symbiont-containing vacuole	name:Synonym:parasitophorous vacuole	info:Definition:Membrane-bounded vacuole within a host cell in which a symbiont organism resides. The vacuole membrane is derived from both the host and symbiont.
0043228	name:Name:non-membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:non-membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, not bounded by a lipid bilayer membrane. Includes ribosomes, the cytoskeleton and chromosomes.
0043232	name:Name:intracellular non-membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:intracellular non-membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, not bounded by a lipid bilayer membrane and occurring within the cell. Includes ribosomes, the cytoskeleton and chromosomes.
0005694	name:Name:chromosome	name:Synonym:chromatid	name:Synonym:interphase chromosome	name:Synonym:prophase chromosome	info:Definition:A structure composed of a very long molecule of DNA and associated proteins (e.g. histones) that carries hereditary information.
0005730	name:Name:nucleolus	info:Definition:A small, dense body one or more of which are present in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. It is rich in RNA and protein, is not bounded by a limiting membrane, and is not seen during mitosis. Its prime function is the transcription of the nucleolar DNA into 45S ribosomal-precursor RNA, the processing of this RNA into 5.8S, 18S, and 28S components of ribosomal RNA, and the association of these components with 5S RNA and proteins synthesized outside the nucleolus. This association results in the formation of ribonucleoprotein precursors; these pass into the cytoplasm and mature into the 40S and 60S subunits of the ribosome.
0005813	name:Name:centrosome	info:Definition:A structure comprised of a core structure (in most organisms, a pair of centrioles) and peripheral material from which a microtubule-based structure, such as a spindle apparatus, is organized. Centrosomes occur close to the nucleus during interphase in many eukaryotic cells, though in animal cells it changes continually during the cell-division cycle.
0005814	name:Name:centriole	info:Definition:A cellular organelle, found close to the nucleus in many eukaryotic cells, consisting of a small cylinder with microtubular walls, 300-500 nm long and 150-250 nm in diameter. It contains nine short, parallel, peripheral microtubular fibrils, each fibril consisting of one complete microtubule fused to two incomplete microtubules. Cells usually have two centrioles, lying at right angles to each other. At division, each pair of centrioles generates another pair and the twin pairs form the pole of the mitotic spindle.
0005818	name:Name:aster	info:Definition:An array of microtubules emanating from a spindle pole MTOC that do not connect to kinetochores.
0005819	name:Name:spindle	info:Definition:The array of microtubules and associated molecules that forms between opposite poles of a eukaryotic cell during mitosis or meiosis and serves to move the duplicated chromosomes apart.
0005856	name:Name:cytoskeleton	info:Definition:Any of the various filamentous elements that form the internal framework of cells, and typically remain after treatment of the cells with mild detergent to remove membrane constituents and soluble components of the cytoplasm. The term embraces intermediate filaments, microfilaments, microtubules, the microtrabecular lattice, and other structures characterized by a polymeric filamentous nature and long-range order within the cell. The various elements of the cytoskeleton not only serve in the maintenance of cellular shape but also have roles in other cellular functions, including cellular movement, cell division, endocytosis, and movement of organelles.
0009288	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum	info:Definition:A motor complex composed of an extracellular helical protein filament coupled to a rotary motor embedded in the cell envelope.
0009295	name:Name:nucleoid	info:Definition:The region of a bacterial cell, mitochondrion or chloroplast to which the DNA is confined.
0030075	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived thylakoid	info:Definition:A thylakoid that is derived from and attached to, but not necessarily continuous with, the plasma membrane, and is not enclosed in a plastid. It bears the photosynthetic pigments in photosynthetic cyanobacteria.
0031469	name:Name:polyhedral organelle	info:Definition:An organelle found in bacteria consisting of a proteinaceous coat containing metabolic enzymes whose purpose is the sequestration or concentration of metabolites and which has the appearance of a polygonal granule by electron microscopy.
0032019	name:Name:mitochondrial cloud	name:Synonym:Balbiani body	info:Definition:A prominent mass in the cytoplasm of previtellogenic oocytes. The cloud contains both mitochondria and electron-dense granulofibrillar material (GFM) and is the source of germinal granule material.
0032421	name:Name:stereocilium bundle	name:Synonym:stereocilia bundle	info:Definition:An actin-based, cross-linked cellular protrusion on the apical surface of auditory and vestibular hair cells. Stereocilium bundles act as mechanosensory organelles by responding to fluid motion or fluid pressure changes.
0042151	name:Name:nematocyst	name:Synonym:cnidocyst	info:Definition:An organelle found in cnidoblast (nematoblast) cells. When matured, these stinging organelles store toxins and can deliver them when the cnidocil (a short extension of the cnidocyst) is stimulated by a prey or another stimulus.
0043292	name:Name:contractile fiber	name:Synonym:contractile fibre	name:Synonym:muscle fiber	name:Synonym:muscle fibre	info:Definition:Fibers, composed of actin, myosin, and associated proteins, found in cells of smooth or striated muscle.
0044312	name:Name:crystalloid	info:Definition:A transient, cytoplasmic organelle found in Plasmodium species that resembles a cytoplasmic inclusion body and whose function is poorly understood. Crystalloids form in ookinetes and disappear after ookinete-to-oocyst transformation.
0045170	name:Name:spectrosome	info:Definition:A germline specific spherical organelle, rich in membrane skeletal proteins. Precursor to the fusome.
0046858	name:Name:chlorosome	info:Definition:A large enclosure of aggregated pigment, typically bacteriochlorophyll c (BChl c), that acts as a light-harvesting antenna structure and is characteristic of green photosynthetic bacteria (e.g. Chlorobiaceae). The BChl aggregates are organized into lamellar elements by pigment-pigment rather than pigment-protein interactions. Chlorosomes also contain BChl a, carotenoids, quinones, lipids, and proteins, and are attached to the cytoplasmic membrane via a BChl a-containing protein baseplate.
0043264	name:Name:extracellular non-membrane-bounded organelle	name:Synonym:extracellular non-membrane-enclosed organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, not bounded by a lipid bilayer membrane and occurring outside the cell.
0043263	name:Name:cellulosome	info:Definition:An extracellular multi-enzyme complex containing up to 11 different enzymes aligned on a non-catalytic scaffolding glycoprotein. Functions to hydrolyze cellulose.
0055039	name:Name:trichocyst	info:Definition:A crystalline exocytotic organelle composed of small, acidic proteins existing primarily as disulphide-linked dimers. The trichocyst is an organelle that releases long filamentous proteins that capture predators in \"nets\" to slow them down when the cell is disturbed. The protein is nontoxic and shaped like a long, striated, fibrous shaft.
0085026	name:Name:tubovesicular membrane network	name:Synonym:TVM network	name:Synonym:TVN	info:Definition:A complex, symbiont-induced host-derived organelle that is comprised of multiple protein and lipid domains.
0043229	name:Name:intracellular organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, occurring within the cell. Includes the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, vesicles, ribosomes and the cytoskeleton. Excludes the plasma membrane.
0019861	name:Name:flagellum	info:Definition:Long whiplike or feathery structures borne either singly or in groups by the motile cells of many bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes and by the motile male gametes of many eukaryotic organisms, which propel the cell through a liquid medium.
0043230	name:Name:extracellular organelle	info:Definition:Organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, occurring outside the cell. Includes, for example, extracellular membrane vesicles (EMVs) and the cellulosomes of anaerobic bacteria and fungi.
0044421	name:Name:extracellular region part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the extracellular region, the space external to the outermost structure of a cell. For cells without external protective or external encapsulating structures this refers to space outside of the plasma membrane. This term covers constituent parts of the host cell environment outside an intracellular parasite.
0005615	name:Name:extracellular space	name:Synonym:intercellular space	info:Definition:That part of a multicellular organism outside the cells proper, usually taken to be outside the plasma membranes, and occupied by fluid.
0009519	name:Name:middle lamella	info:Definition:Layer of intercellular material, chiefly pectic substances, cementing together the primary walls of contiguous cells.
0031012	name:Name:extracellular matrix	info:Definition:A structure lying external to one or more cells, which provides structural support for cells or tissues; may be completely external to the cell (as in animals) or be part of the cell (as in plants).
0005578	name:Name:proteinaceous extracellular matrix	info:Definition:A layer consisting mainly of proteins (especially collagen) and glycosaminoglycans (mostly as proteoglycans) that forms a sheet underlying or overlying cells such as endothelial and epithelial cells. The proteins are secreted by cells in the vicinity. An example of this component is found in Mus musculus.
0005614	name:Name:interstitial matrix	info:Definition:A type of extracellular matrix found in interstitial connective tissue, characterized by the presence of fibronectins, proteoglycans, and types I, III, V, VI, VII and XII collagens.
0033165	name:Name:interphotoreceptor matrix	info:Definition:A specialized extracellularc matrix that surrounds the photoreceptors of the retina and lies between them and the apical surface of the retinal pigment epithelium. The IPM has been implicated in several important activities required for photoreceptor function and maintenance.
0033166	name:Name:hyaline layer	info:Definition:A multilayered extraembryonic matrix that functions as a substrate for cell adhesion through early development. It is thought to protect and lubricate the embryo, stabilize the blastomeres during morphogenesis, and regulate nutrient intake. The major constituent of the hyaline layer is the protein hyalin. This matrix has been found in echinoderms.
0060102	name:Name:collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:collagen and cuticulin-based exoskeleton extracellular matrix	info:Definition:A collagen and cuticulin-based noncellular, multilayered structure that is synthesized by an underlying ectodermal (hypodermal) cell layer. The cuticle serves essential functions in body morphology, locomotion, and environmental protection. An example of this component is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0048196	name:Name:middle lamella-containing extracellular matrix	info:Definition:The matrix external to the cell, composed of the cell wall and middle lamella.
0009530	name:Name:primary cell wall	info:Definition:A plant cell wall that is still able to expand, permitting cell growth. Primary cell walls contain more pectin than secondary walls and no lignin is present.
0009531	name:Name:secondary cell wall	info:Definition:A plant cell wall that is no longer able to expand and so does not permit growth. Secondary cell walls contain less pectin that primary cell walls. The secondary cell is mostly composed of cellulose and is strengthened with lignin.
0035182	name:Name:female germline ring canal outer rim	name:Synonym:germline ring canal outer rim	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal outer rim	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal outer rim	info:Definition:An electron opaque backbone of the insect ovarian ring canal that is a part of or adjacent to the plasma membrane. The outer rim is established as the cleavage furrow is arrested, and contains F-actin, anillin, glycoproteins and at least one a protein with a high content of phosphorylated tyrosine residues.
0035183	name:Name:female germline ring canal inner rim	name:Synonym:germline ring canal inner rim	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal inner rim	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal inner rim	info:Definition:A proteinaceous actin-rich layer of the insect ovarian ring canal that forms subcortically to the outer rim. The electron dense inner rim accumulates after the final mitotic division of each germline syncytia, and contains actin, a phosphotyrosine protein, and a number of cytoskeletal proteins.
0043245	name:Name:extraorganismal space	info:Definition:The environmental space outside of an organism; this may be a host organism in the case of parasitic and symbiotic organisms.
0044215	name:Name:other organism	info:Definition:A secondary organism with which the first organism is interacting.
0018995	name:Name:host	name:Synonym:host organism	info:Definition:Any organism in which another organism, especially a parasite or symbiont, spends part or all of its life cycle and from which it obtains nourishment and/or protection.
0043655	name:Name:extracellular space of host	name:Synonym:host extracellular space	info:Definition:The space within a host but external to the plasma membrane of host cells, e.g. within host bloodstream.
0044217	name:Name:other organism part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a secondary organism with which the first organism is interacting.
0033643	name:Name:host cell part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a host cell. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0020004	name:Name:symbiont-containing vacuolar space	name:Synonym:parasitophorous vacuolar space	name:Synonym:symbiont-containing vacuole space	info:Definition:The space between a symbiont plasma membrane and the symbiont-containing vacuole membrane.
0020005	name:Name:symbiont-containing vacuole membrane	name:Synonym:parasitophorous vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a symbiont-containing vacuole, derived from both the host and symbiont.
0020006	name:Name:symbiont-containing vacuolar membrane network	name:Synonym:parasitophorous vacuolar membrane network	name:Synonym:symbiont-containing vacuole membrane network	name:Synonym:tubulovesicular network	info:Definition:Tubular network of extensions from the symbiont-containing vacuole membrane that protrude into the host cytoplasm.
0033644	name:Name:host cell membrane	info:Definition:Double layer of lipid molecules as it encloses host cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0033646	name:Name:host intracellular part	name:Synonym:host cell intracellular part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the living contents of a host cell; the matter contained within (but not including) the plasma membrane, usually taken to exclude large vacuoles and masses of secretory or ingested material. In eukaryotes it includes the nucleus and cytoplasm. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0043656	name:Name:intracellular region of host	name:Synonym:host intracellular	info:Definition:That space within the plasma membrane of a host cell.
0043664	name:Name:host peribacteroid membrane	info:Definition:A host-derived membrane that surrounds one or more bacteroids (such as nitrogen-fixing bacteroids within legume root nodule cells).
0043665	name:Name:host peribacteroid fluid	info:Definition:The soluble material inside the peribacteroid membrane, but outside of the bacteroid, within a bacteroid-containing symbiosome of a host cell.
0044155	name:Name:host caveola	info:Definition:A small pit, depression, or invagination, such as any of the minute pits or incuppings of the host cell membrane formed during pinocytosis, that communicates with the outside of a host cell and extends inward, indenting the host cytoplasm and the host cell membrane. Such caveolae may be pinched off to form free vesicles within the host cytoplasm. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044156	name:Name:host cell junction	info:Definition:A plasma membrane part that forms a specialized region of connection between two host cells or between a host cell and the host extracellular matrix. At a host cell junction, anchoring proteins extend through the host plasma membrane to link cytoskeletal proteins in one cell to cytoskeletal proteins in neighboring cells or to proteins in the extracellular matrix.
0044157	name:Name:host cell projection	info:Definition:A prolongation or process extending from a host cell, e.g. a flagellum or axon.
0044158	name:Name:host cell wall	info:Definition:The rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the host cell membrane of plant, fungal, and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis. In plants it is made of cellulose and, often, lignin; in fungi it is composed largely of polysaccharides; in bacteria it is composed of peptidoglycan.
0044189	name:Name:host cell microsome	name:Synonym:host cell microsomal membrane 	info:Definition:Any of the small, heterogeneous, artifactual, vesicular particles, 50-150 nm in diameter, that are formed when some eukaryotic host cells are homogenized and that sediment on centrifugation at 100000 g.
0044221	name:Name:host cell synapse	info:Definition:The junction between a nerve fiber of one host neuron and another host neuron or muscle fiber or glial cell; the site of interneuronal communication.
0044228	name:Name:host cell surface	info:Definition:The external part of the host cell wall and/or host plasma membrane.
0044229	name:Name:host cell periplasmic space	info:Definition:The region between the inner (cytoplasmic) and outer host membrane (Gram-negative Bacteria) or inner host membrane and host cell wall (Fungi).
0044230	name:Name:host cell envelope	info:Definition:An envelope that surrounds a bacterial host cell and includes the host cytoplasmic membrane and everything external, encompassing the host periplasmic space, host cell wall, and host outer membrane if present.
0044216	name:Name:other organism cell	info:Definition:A cell of a secondary organism with which the first organism is interacting.
0043657	name:Name:host cell	info:Definition:A cell within a host organism. Includes the host plasma membrane and any external encapsulating structures such as the host cell wall and cell envelope.
0044279	name:Name:other organism membrane	info:Definition:A membrane of a secondary organism with which the first organism is interacting.
0044218	name:Name:other organism cell membrane	name:Synonym:foreign membrane	info:Definition:The cell membrane of a secondary organism with which the first organism is interacting.
0044420	name:Name:extracellular matrix part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the extracellular matrix, the structure lying external to one or more cells, which provides structural support for cells or tissues; may be completely external to the cell (as in animals) or be part of the cell (as often seen in plants).
0005581	name:Name:collagen	name:Synonym:other collagen	info:Definition:Any of the various assemblies in which collagen chains form a left-handed triple helix; may assemble into higher order structures.
0005582	name:Name:collagen type XV	info:Definition:A collagen homotrimer of alpha1(XV) chains; a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan often found in specialized basement membranes.
0005583	name:Name:fibrillar collagen	info:Definition:Any collagen polymer in which collagen triple helices associate to form fibrils.
0030934	name:Name:anchoring collagen	name:Synonym:connecting collagen	name:Synonym:linking collagen	info:Definition:Any collagen polymer which links one collagen assembly, such as a collagen fibril or sheet, to other structures.
0030935	name:Name:sheet-forming collagen	name:Synonym:network-forming collagen	info:Definition:Any collagen polymer in which collagen triple helices associate to form sheet-like networks.
0030936	name:Name:transmembrane collagen	name:Synonym:MACIT	info:Definition:Any collagen polymer that passes through a lipid bilayer membrane.
0005604	name:Name:basement membrane	info:Definition:A thin layer of dense material found in various animal tissues interposed between the cells and the adjacent connective tissue. It consists of the basal lamina plus an associated layer of reticulin fibers.
0005605	name:Name:basal lamina	name:Synonym:basement lamina	info:Definition:A thin sheet of proteoglycans and glycoproteins, especially laminin, secreted by cells as an extracellular matrix.
0008002	name:Name:lamina lucida	info:Definition:The electron-lucent layer of the basal lamina adjacent to the basal plasma membrane of the cells that rest on the lamina.
0008003	name:Name:lamina densa	info:Definition:The electron-dense layer of the basal lamina; lies just below the lamina lucida.
0008004	name:Name:lamina reticularis	info:Definition:A layer of the basal lamina that contains collagen fibrils and connects the basal lamina to the underlying connective tissue.
0032579	name:Name:apical lamina of hyaline layer	info:Definition:A fibrous network that is part of the hyalin layer extracellular matrix. The apical lamina is thought to be principally composed of the glycoproteins fibropellins. This matrix has been found in echinoderms.
0043083	name:Name:synaptic cleft	info:Definition:The narrow gap that separates the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes, into which neurotransmitter is released.
0043205	name:Name:fibril	info:Definition:Extracellular matrix material consisting of polysaccharides and protein.
0001527	name:Name:microfibril	name:Synonym:extended fibrils	name:Synonym:fibrillin	info:Definition:Extracellular matrix components occurring independently or along with elastin. Thought to have force-bearing functions in tendon. In addition to fibrillins, microfibrils may contain other associated proteins.
0043667	name:Name:pollen wall	name:Synonym:microspore wall	info:Definition:The complex wall surrounding a pollen grain.
0043668	name:Name:exine	info:Definition:The outer layer of the pollen grain wall which is composed primarily of sporopollenin.
0043669	name:Name:ectexine	info:Definition:The outer part of the exine, which stains positively with basic fuchsin in optical microscopy and has higher electron density in conventionally prepared TEM sections.
0043670	name:Name:foot layer	name:Synonym:nexine 1	info:Definition:The inner layer of the ectexine.
0043671	name:Name:endexine	info:Definition:The inner part of the exine, which stains.
0043672	name:Name:nexine	info:Definition:The inner, non-sculptured part of the exine which lies below the sexine.
0043673	name:Name:sexine	info:Definition:The outer, sculptured layer of the exine, which lies above the nexine.
0043674	name:Name:columella	name:Synonym:sexine 1	info:Definition:A rod-like element of the sexine and ectexine, supporting either the tectum (the layer of sexine which forms a roof over the columella), or supporting a caput (an architectural element on top of a columella).
0043675	name:Name:sculpture element	info:Definition:The third layer of the sexine.
0043676	name:Name:tectum	name:Synonym:sexine 2	info:Definition:The layer of sexine which forms a roof over the columella, granules or other infratectal elements.
0043677	name:Name:germination pore	name:Synonym:germ pore	info:Definition:A small pore in the outer wall of a mycelial spore through which the germ tube exits upon germination. It can be apical or eccentric in its location.
0043678	name:Name:intine	info:Definition:The innermost of the major layers of the pollen grain wall which underlies the exine and borders the cytoplasm.
0048217	name:Name:pectic matrix	info:Definition:The gel-like pectin matrix consists of the interlinked acidic and neutral pectin networks that are further cross-linked by calcium bridges. Pectins consist largely of long chains of mostly galacturonic acid units (typically 1,4 linkages and sometimes methyl esters). Three major pectic polysaccharides (homogalacturonan, rhamnogalacturonan I and rhamnogalacturonan II) are thought to occur in all primary cell walls.
0048222	name:Name:glycoprotein network	name:Synonym:extensin	info:Definition:An extracellular matrix part that consists of cross-linked glycoproteins.
0048223	name:Name:hemicellulose network	info:Definition:Network composed of hemicelluloses; members of a class of plant cell wall polysaccharide that cannot be extracted from the wall by hot water or chelating agents, but can be extracted by aqueous alkali. Includes xylan, glucuronoxylan, arabinoxylan, arabinogalactan II, glucomannan, xyloglucan and galactomannan.
0048224	name:Name:lignin network	info:Definition:An extracellular matrix part that consists of lignin in the form of a three-dimensional polymeric network. Lignins are complex racemic aromatic heteropolymers derived from a variety of phenylpropane monomers coupled together by an assortment of carbon-carbon and ether linkages. Lignin is crucial for structural integrity of the cell wall and stiffness and strength of the stem. In addition, lignin waterproofs the cell wall, enabling transport of water and solutes through the vascular system, and plays a role in protecting plants against pathogens.
0048225	name:Name:suberin network	info:Definition:An extracellular matrix part that consists of fatty acid-derived polymers, including both aromatic and aliphatic components. The suberin network is found in specialized plant cell walls, where it is laid down between the primary wall and plasmalemma, forms protective and wound-healing layers, and provides a water-impermeable diffusion barrier.
0048226	name:Name:Casparian strip	info:Definition:Region of plant cell wall specialised to act as a seal to prevent back leakage of secreted material (analogous to tight junction between epithelial cells). Found particularly where root parenchymal cells secrete solutes into xylem vessels. The barrier is composed of suberin; a fatty substance, containing long chain fatty acids and fatty esters, also found in the cell walls of cork cells (phellem) in higher plants.
0060103	name:Name:collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix, a collagen and cuticulin-based noncellular, multilayered structure that is synthesized by an underlying ectodermal (hypodermal) cell layer.
0060104	name:Name:surface coat of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:surface coat of collagen and cuticulin-based exoskeleton extracellular matrix	info:Definition:An electron dense, amorphous envelope that comprises the outermost layer of the cuticle. The surface coat is loosely apposed to the epicuticle, has distinct biochemical properties, is synthesized by cells other than the underlying hypodermis, and is labile. In addition to serving as a lubricant to protect against abrasion and dehydration, the surface coat may also play important roles in infection and immune evasion. An example of this component is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0060105	name:Name:epicuticle of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:epicuticle of collagen and cuticulin-based exoskeleton extracellular matrix	info:Definition:A lipid-containing layer of cuticle that lies between the cortical layer and the surface coat. An example of this component is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0060106	name:Name:cortical layer of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	info:Definition:The cuticle layer that lies directly beneath the lipid-containing epicuticle. The cortical layer contains collagens and insoluble, non-collagenous cuticulins and is characterized by a distinct annular pattern consisting of regularly spaced annular ridges delineated by annular furrows. An example of this component is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0060107	name:Name:annuli extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:annulae	name:Synonym:annular rings	name:Synonym:annule(s)	name:Synonym:annulus	info:Definition:The extracellular matrix that is a regularly spaced circumferential ridge present in the cortical region of the cuticle. Annuli are delineated by annular furrows and are present throughout the cuticle with the exception of lateral regions where longitudinal alae are present.
0060108	name:Name:annular furrow extracellular matrix	info:Definition:The extracellular matrix part that is a regularly spaced indentation in the outer cortical layer of the cuticle. The pattern of annular furrows corresponds to sites of invaginations in hypodermal cell membranes that, in turn, correspond to submembranous regions where actin microfilament bundles assemble early in lethargus, the first phase of the molting cycle in which activity and feeding decline.
0060109	name:Name:medial layer of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:medial layer struts	info:Definition:The fluid-filled cuticle layer that lies between the cortical and basal layers and is characterized by the presence of regularly spaced columnar struts that lie on either side of the annular furrows and link the two surrounding layers. In C. elegans, a defined medial layer is found only in adult animals.
0060110	name:Name:basal layer of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:basal layer of collagen and cuticulin-based exoskeleton extracellular matrix	info:Definition:The layer of cuticle most closely apposed to the hypodermal cells. The morphology of the basal layer varies with life stage. In adult C. elegans animals, the basal layers is comprised of three sublayers: two fibrous layers whose fibers run in clockwise and counter-clockwise directions meeting one another at a 60 degree angle, and an amorphous basal layer that lies underneath the fibrous layers and directly contacts the hypodermis. In C. elegans dauer and L1 larval stage animals, the basal layer is characterized by a striated pattern that appears to derive from interwoven laminae. An example of this component is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0060111	name:Name:alae of collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle extracellular matrix	name:Synonym:alae of collagen and cuticulin-based exoskeleton extracellular matrix	info:Definition:Raised, thickened cuticular ridges that run longitudinally, and in parallel, along the left and right sides of the animal. The alae lie above the hypodermal cells known as the lateral seam cells. In C. elegans, alae are produced in L1 larvae, dauer larvae and adult stage animals, where they consist of three, five, and three ridges of distinct morphology, respectively.
0070505	name:Name:pollen coat	name:Synonym:pollenkitt	name:Synonym:tryphine	info:Definition:A layer of extracellular matrix deposited onto the surface of the pollen wall upon disintegration of the tapetal layer of the anther wall in the late stages of pollen development. The composition of this material is highly heterogeneous and includes waxes, lipid droplets, small aromatic molecules, and proteins. The pollen coat is proposed to have many functions, such as holding pollen in the anther until dispersal, facilitation of pollen dispersal, protection of pollen from water loss and UV radiation, and facilitation of adhesion of pollen to the stigma.
0070645	name:Name:Ubisch body	name:Synonym:orbicule	info:Definition:A small, granular structure that is found in the extracellular matrix of cell of the secretory tapetal layer that surrounds developing pollen grains. Ubisch bodies have a sporopollenin coat, are attached to the peritapetal wall, and may play a role in pollen development.
0071953	name:Name:elastic fiber	name:Synonym:elastic fibre	name:Synonym:elastin fiber	info:Definition:An extracellular matrix part that consists of an insoluble core of polymerized tropoelastin monomers and a surrounding mantle of microfibrils. Elastic fibers provide elasticity and recoiling to tissues and organs, and maintain structural integrity against mechanical strain.
0072534	name:Name:perineuronal net	name:Synonym:PNN	info:Definition:A dense extracellular matrix (ECM) structure that forms around many neuronal cell bodies and dendrites late in development and is responsible for synaptic stabilization in the adult brain.
0045171	name:Name:intercellular bridge	info:Definition:A direct link between the cytoplasms of sister cells that allows cells to communicate with one another. Germline intercellular bridges facilitate the passage of cytoplasmic components between cells during development. Intercellular bridges have also been found connecting somatic cells.
0045172	name:Name:germline ring canal	info:Definition:Germline specific intercellular bridge. During cyst formation in insects, ring canals interconnect the cells of the cyst, facilitating the passage of cytoplasmic components between cells.
0035323	name:Name:male germline ring canal	name:Synonym:spermatocyte ring canal	name:Synonym:testicular ring canal	info:Definition:An intercellular bridge that connects the germline cells of a male cyst.
0035324	name:Name:female germline ring canal	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal	info:Definition:An intercellular bridge that connects the germline cells of a female cyst.
0070701	name:Name:mucus layer	info:Definition:An extracellular region part that consists of a protective layer of mucus secreted by epithelial cells lining tubular organs of the body such as the colon. Mucus is a viscous slimy secretion consisting of mucins and various inorganic salts dissolved in water, with suspended epithelial cells and leukocytes.
0070702	name:Name:inner mucus layer	info:Definition:The inner of two mucus layers secreted by epithelial cells in the colon; the inner mucus layer is firmly attached to the epithelium, is densely packed with a compact stratified appearance and is devoid of bacteria.
0070703	name:Name:outer mucus layer	info:Definition:The outer of two mucus layers secreted by epithelial cells in the colon; the outer mucus layer is loosely packed and can be colonized by bacteria.
0072324	name:Name:ascus epiplasm	info:Definition:An extracellular part that consist of ascus cytoplasm that is not packaged into ascospores.
0072562	name:Name:blood microparticle	name:Synonym:cell membrane microparticle	info:Definition:A phospholipid microvesicle that is derived from any of several cell types, such as platelets, blood cells, endothelial cells, or others, and contains membrane receptors as well as other proteins characteristic of the parental cell. Microparticles are heterogeneous in size, and are characterized as microvesicles free of nucleic acids.
0072563	name:Name:endothelial microparticle	info:Definition:A blood microparticle that is derived from, and contains membrane receptors as well as other proteins characteristic of, an endothelial cell.
0085036	name:Name:extrahaustorial matrix	info:Definition:The space between the symbiont plasma membrane and the extrahaustorial membrane of the host.
0085040	name:Name:extra-invasive hyphal space	info:Definition:The space between the symbiont plasma membrane and the extra-invasive hyphal membrane.
0044422	name:Name:organelle part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of an organelle, an organized structure of distinctive morphology and function. Includes constituent parts of the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, vesicles, ribosomes and the cytoskeleton, but excludes the plasma membrane.
0005930	name:Name:axoneme	info:Definition:The bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of cilia and flagella in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for their movements.
0035085	name:Name:cilium axoneme	info:Definition:The bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of cilia in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for their movements.
0035086	name:Name:flagellar axoneme	name:Synonym:flagellum axoneme	info:Definition:The bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of flagellar in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for their movements.
0030094	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived photosystem I	name:Synonym:plasma membrane photosystem I	info:Definition:A protein complex located in the plasma membrane-derived thylakoid. The photosystem functions as a light-dependent plastocyanin-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, transferring electrons from plastocyanin to ferredoxin. Examples of this complex are found in bacterial species.
0030096	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived thylakoid photosystem II	name:Synonym:plasma membrane photosystem II	info:Definition:A protein complex, located in the membrane-derived thylakoid, containing the P680 reaction center. In the light, PSII functions as a water-plastoquinone oxidoreductase, transferring electrons from water to plastoquinone.
0031090	name:Name:organelle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an organelle.
0000139	name:Name:Golgi membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any of the compartments of the Golgi apparatus.
0030660	name:Name:Golgi-associated vesicle membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi vesicle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a vesicle associated with the Golgi apparatus.
0032580	name:Name:Golgi cisterna membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi stack membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any of the thin, flattened compartments that form the central portion of the Golgi complex.
0032588	name:Name:trans-Golgi network membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi trans face membrane	name:Synonym:trans Golgi network membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any of the compartments that make up the trans-Golgi network.
0033106	name:Name:cis-Golgi network membrane	name:Synonym:cis Golgi network membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi cis face membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any of the compartments that make up the cis-Golgi network.
0005774	name:Name:vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the vacuole and separating its contents from the cytoplasm of the cell.
0000329	name:Name:fungal-type vacuole membrane	name:Synonym:fungal-type vacuolar membrane	name:Synonym:membrane of vacuole with cell cycle-correlated morphology	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a vacuole, the shape of which correlates with cell cycle phase. The membrane separates its contents from the cytoplasm of the cell. An example of this structure is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0000421	name:Name:autophagic vacuole membrane	name:Synonym:autophagosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an autophagic vacuole, a double-membrane-bounded vesicle in which endogenous cellular material is sequestered.
0005765	name:Name:lysosomal membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the lysosome and separating its contents from the cell cytoplasm.
0009705	name:Name:plant-type vacuole membrane	name:Synonym:membrane of vacuole with cell cycle-independent morphology	name:Synonym:tonoplast	name:Synonym:vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a vacuole that retains the same shape regardless of cell cycle phase. The membrane separates its contents from the cytoplasm of the cell. An example of this component is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0031164	name:Name:contractile vacuolar membrane	name:Synonym:contractile vacuole membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the contractile vacuole.
0035577	name:Name:azurophil granule membrane	name:Synonym:primary granule membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an azurophil granule, a primary lysosomal granule found in neutrophil granulocytes that contains a wide range of hydrolytic enzymes and is released into the extracellular fluid.
0005789	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum membrane	name:Synonym:ER membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the endoplasmic reticulum.
0030867	name:Name:rough endoplasmic reticulum membrane	name:Synonym:RER membrane	name:Synonym:rough ER membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
0030868	name:Name:smooth endoplasmic reticulum membrane	name:Synonym:SER membrane	name:Synonym:smooth ER membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
0033017	name:Name:sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
0010008	name:Name:endosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an endosome.
0031901	name:Name:early endosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an early endosome.
0031902	name:Name:late endosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a late endosome.
0055038	name:Name:recycling endosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a recycling endosome.
0012506	name:Name:vesicle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any membrane-bounded vesicle in the cell.
0030659	name:Name:cytoplasmic vesicle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a cytoplasmic vesicle.
0019866	name:Name:organelle inner membrane	info:Definition:The inner, i.e. lumen-facing, lipid bilayer of an organelle envelope; usually highly selective to most ions and metabolites.
0005637	name:Name:nuclear inner membrane	name:Synonym:inner envelope	info:Definition:The inner, i.e. lumen-facing, lipid bilayer of the nuclear envelope.
0005743	name:Name:mitochondrial inner membrane	name:Synonym:inner mitochondrial membrane	info:Definition:The inner, i.e. lumen-facing, lipid bilayer of the mitochondrial envelope. It is highly folded to form cristae.
0009528	name:Name:plastid inner membrane	info:Definition:The inner, i.e. lumen-facing, lipid bilayer of the plastid envelope; also faces the plastid stroma.
0020017	name:Name:flagellar membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding the flagellum.
0020018	name:Name:flagellar pocket membrane	info:Definition:That part of the plasma membrane found in the flagellar pocket.
0031095	name:Name:platelet dense tubular network membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding the platelet dense tubular network.
0031903	name:Name:microbody membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a microbody.
0005778	name:Name:peroxisomal membrane	name:Synonym:peroxisome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a peroxisome.
0031965	name:Name:nuclear membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround the nucleus and form the nuclear envelope; excludes the intermembrane space.
0005640	name:Name:nuclear outer membrane	name:Synonym:outer envelope	name:Synonym:perinuclear membrane	info:Definition:The outer, i.e. cytoplasm-facing, lipid bilayer of the nuclear envelope; continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum of the cell and sometimes studded with ribosomes.
0031966	name:Name:mitochondrial membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround the mitochondrion and form the mitochondrial envelope.
0005741	name:Name:mitochondrial outer membrane	name:Synonym:outer mitochondrial membrane	info:Definition:The outer, i.e. cytoplasm-facing, lipid bilayer of the mitochondrial envelope.
0031968	name:Name:organelle outer membrane	info:Definition:The outer, i.e. cytoplasm-facing in a cellular organelle, lipid bilayer of an organelle envelope.
0009527	name:Name:plastid outer membrane	info:Definition:The outer, i.e. cytoplasm-facing, lipid bilayer of the plastid envelope.
0033016	name:Name:rhoptry membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a rhoptry.
0033102	name:Name:acidocalcisome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an acidocalcisome.
0033111	name:Name:attachment organelle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding an attachment organelle.
0033116	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment membrane	name:Synonym:ER-Golgi intermediate compartment membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding any of the compartments of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi intermediate compartment system.
0033163	name:Name:microneme membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a microneme.
0042170	name:Name:plastid membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround a plastid and form the plastid envelope.
0031969	name:Name:chloroplast membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround a chloroplast and form the chloroplast envelope.
0033097	name:Name:amyloplast membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround an amyloplast and form the amyloplast envelope.
0033113	name:Name:cyanelle membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround a cyanelle and form the cyanelle envelope.
0034426	name:Name:etioplast membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround a etioplast and form the etioplast envelope.
0046862	name:Name:chromoplast membrane	info:Definition:Either of the lipid bilayers that surround a chromoplast and form the chromoplast envelope.
0046859	name:Name:hydrogenosomal membrane	name:Synonym:hydrogenosome membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a hydrogenosome.
0031676	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived thylakoid membrane	name:Synonym:plasma membrane thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:The pigmented membrane of a plasma membrane-derived thylakoid.
0032420	name:Name:stereocilium	info:Definition:An actin-based protrusion from the apical surface of auditory and vestibular hair cells. Bundles of stereocilia act as mechanosensory organelles.
0044232	name:Name:organelle membrane contact site	name:Synonym:inter-organelle junction	name:Synonym:interorganelle junction	name:Synonym:MCS	info:Definition:A zone of apposition between the membranes of two organelles, structured by bridging complexes. Membrane contact sites (MCSs) are specialized for communication, including the efficient traffic of small molecules such as Ca2+ ions and lipids, as well as enzyme-substrate interactions.
0044233	name:Name:ER-mitochondrion membrane contact site	name:Synonym:endoplasmic-reticulum-mitochondrion membrane contact site	info:Definition:A zone of apposition between endoplasmic-reticulum and mitochondrial membranes, structured by bridging complexes. These contact sites are thought to facilitate inter-organelle calcium and phospholipid exchange.
0071561	name:Name:nucleus-vacuole junction	name:Synonym:nucleus-vacuole membrane contact site	name:Synonym:NV junction	name:Synonym:NVJ	info:Definition:An organelle membrane contact site formed between the vacuole membrane and the outer nuclear membrane. In S. cerevisiae these contacts are mediated through direct physical interaction between Vac8p and Nvj1p.
0044446	name:Name:intracellular organelle part	info:Definition:A constituent part of an intracellular organelle, an organized structure of distinctive morphology and function, occurring within the cell. Includes constituent parts of the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, vesicles, ribosomes and the cytoskeleton but excludes the plasma membrane.
0031300	name:Name:intrinsic to organelle membrane	info:Definition:Located in an organelle membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031227	name:Name:intrinsic to endoplasmic reticulum membrane	info:Definition:Located in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031228	name:Name:intrinsic to Golgi membrane	info:Definition:Located in the Golgi membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031229	name:Name:intrinsic to nuclear inner membrane	info:Definition:Located in the nuclear inner membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031231	name:Name:intrinsic to peroxisomal membrane	info:Definition:Located in the peroxisomal membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031301	name:Name:integral to organelle membrane	info:Definition:Penetrating at least one phospholipid bilayer of an organelle membrane. May also refer to the state of being buried in the bilayer with no exposure outside the bilayer.
0031302	name:Name:intrinsic to endosome membrane	info:Definition:Located in the endosome membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031304	name:Name:intrinsic to mitochondrial inner membrane	info:Definition:Located in the mitochondrial inner membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031306	name:Name:intrinsic to mitochondrial outer membrane	info:Definition:Located in the mitochondrial outer membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031308	name:Name:intrinsic to nuclear outer membrane	info:Definition:Located in the nuclear outer membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031310	name:Name:intrinsic to vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:Located in the vacuolar membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031350	name:Name:intrinsic to plastid membrane	info:Definition:Located in a plastid membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031312	name:Name:extrinsic to organelle membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of an organelle membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0000306	name:Name:extrinsic to vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one or the other surface of the vacuolar membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0005780	name:Name:extrinsic to intraperoxisomal membrane	name:Synonym:intra-peroxisomal peripheral membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to the intraperoxisomal surface of the peroxisomal membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031313	name:Name:extrinsic to endosome membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the endosome membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031314	name:Name:extrinsic to mitochondrial inner membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the mitochondrial inner membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031315	name:Name:extrinsic to mitochondrial outer membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the mitochondrial outer membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031316	name:Name:extrinsic to nuclear outer membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the nuclear outer membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0035452	name:Name:extrinsic to plastid membrane	name:Synonym:peripheral to plastid membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of a plastid membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0042406	name:Name:extrinsic to endoplasmic reticulum membrane	name:Synonym:extrinsic to ER membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031967	name:Name:organelle envelope	info:Definition:A double membrane structure enclosing an organelle, including two lipid bilayers and the region between them. In some cases, an organelle envelope may have more than two membranes.
0005635	name:Name:nuclear envelope	info:Definition:The double lipid bilayer enclosing the nucleus and separating its contents from the rest of the cytoplasm; includes the intermembrane space, a gap of width 20-40 nm (also called the perinuclear space).
0005740	name:Name:mitochondrial envelope	info:Definition:The double lipid bilayer enclosing the mitochondrion and separating its contents from the cell cytoplasm; includes the intermembrane space.
0009526	name:Name:plastid envelope	info:Definition:The double lipid bilayer enclosing a plastid and separating its contents from the rest of the cytoplasm; includes the intermembrane space.
0070732	name:Name:spindle envelope	info:Definition:An organelle envelope that surrounds the chromosomes and the central part of the spindle apparatus during mitosis and meiosis; observed in many invertebrates. The spindle envelope consists of membrane layers, called parafusorial membranes, derived from endoplasmic reticulum membrane; in male meiosis it forms during prometaphase and persists until early in the ensuing interphase.
0031984	name:Name:organelle subcompartment	name:Synonym:suborganelle compartment	info:Definition:A compartment that consists of a lumen and an enclosing membrane, and is part of an organelle.
0014802	name:Name:terminal cisterna	info:Definition:The portion of sarcoplasmic reticulum devoted to calcium ion storage and calcium ion release.
0016029	name:Name:subrhabdomeral cisterna	name:Synonym:SMC	name:Synonym:submicrovillar cisterna	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded compartment that is found at the base of the rhabdomere and contains stored calcium, InsP3 receptors and smooth endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase.
0031976	name:Name:plastid thylakoid	info:Definition:Any thylakoid within a plastid.
0031985	name:Name:Golgi cisterna	info:Definition:Any of the thin, flattened membrane-bounded compartments that form the central portion of the Golgi complex.
0032046	name:Name:micropexophagy-specific membrane apparatus	name:Synonym:micropexophagic apparatus	name:Synonym:MIPA	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded flattened sac that is formed during micropexophagy between the membrane tips of an engulfing vacuole, completing the engulfment and sequestration of peroxisomes from the cytosol, and forming a micropexophagic body within the lumen of the vacuole.
0032426	name:Name:stereocilium bundle tip	name:Synonym:stereocilium tip	info:Definition:The end of a stereocilium bundle, distal to the site of the bundle's attachment to the apical cell surface.
0034646	name:Name:organelle-enclosing lipid monolayer	info:Definition:A lipid monolayer that surrounds and encloses an organelle.
0033105	name:Name:chlorosome envelope	name:Synonym:chlorosome membrane	info:Definition:The structure, composed of a monolayer of glycolipids with embedded proteins, that encloses the pigments and other contents of the chlorosome.
0034430	name:Name:monolayer-surrounded lipid storage body outer lipid monolayer	name:Synonym:lipid droplet outer lipid monolayer	name:Synonym:lipid storage body surface lipid monolayer	name:Synonym:oil body outer lipid monolayer	name:Synonym:oleosome outer lipid monolayer	name:Synonym:spherosome outer lipid monolayer	info:Definition:The single layer of phopholipids surrounding a lipid storage body.
0044427	name:Name:chromosomal part	name:Synonym:chromosomal component	name:Synonym:chromosome component	name:Synonym:chromosome part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a chromosome, a structure composed of a very long molecule of DNA and associated proteins (e.g. histones) that carries hereditary information.
0000775	name:Name:chromosome, centromeric region	name:Synonym:centromere	name:Synonym:chromosome, centric region	name:Synonym:chromosome, pericentric region	info:Definition:The region of a chromosome that includes the centromeric DNA and associated proteins. In monocentric chromosomes, this region corresponds to a single area of the chromosome, whereas in holocentric chromosomes, it is evenly distributed along the chromosome.
0000781	name:Name:chromosome, telomeric region	name:Synonym:telomere	info:Definition:The terminal region of a linear chromosome that includes the telomeric DNA repeats and associated proteins.
0000785	name:Name:chromatin	name:Synonym:chromosome scaffold	info:Definition:The ordered and organized complex of DNA and protein that forms the chromosome.
0005657	name:Name:replication fork	name:Synonym:replication focus	info:Definition:The Y-shaped region of a replicating DNA molecule, resulting from the separation of the DNA strands and in which the synthesis of new strands takes place. Also includes associated protein complexes.
0005702	name:Name:polytene chromosome weak point	name:Synonym:constriction	info:Definition:A region of the polytene chromosome where the diameter is considerably decreased, probably resulting from local differences in chromosome organization.
0005703	name:Name:polytene chromosome puff	info:Definition:A swelling at a site along the length of a polytene chromosome, thought to be the site of active transcription.
0005704	name:Name:polytene chromosome band	info:Definition:A stretch of densely packed chromatin along the polytene chromosome, visible as a morphologically distinct band.
0005705	name:Name:polytene chromosome interband	info:Definition:A stretch of less tightly packed chromatin along the polytene chromosome, found between bands.
0005706	name:Name:polytene chromosome ectopic fiber	name:Synonym:polytene chromosome ectopic fibre	info:Definition:A thread-like connection joining two regions of ectopically paired polytene chromosomes.
0010369	name:Name:chromocenter	info:Definition:A region in which centric, heterochromatic portions of one or more chromosomes form a compact structure.
0019038	name:Name:provirus	info:Definition:The name given to a viral genome after it has been integrated into the host genome; particularly applies to retroviruses and is a required part of the retroviral replication cycle.
0034506	name:Name:chromosome, centromeric core region	name:Synonym:chromosome, centric core region	info:Definition:The innermost portion of the centromeric region of a chromosome, encompassing the core region of a chromosome centromere and the proteins that bind to it.
0034507	name:Name:chromosome, centromeric outer repeat region	name:Synonym:chromosome, centric outer repeat region	info:Definition:The portion of the centromeric region of a chromosome that flanks the core region, encompassing repeated regions of a chromosome centromere and the proteins that bind to it.
0035861	name:Name:site of double-strand break	name:Synonym:DNA damage foci	name:Synonym:DNA damage focus	name:Synonym:ionizing radiation-induced foci	name:Synonym:IRIF	name:Synonym:site of DSB	info:Definition:A region of a chromosome at which a DNA double-strand break has occurred. DNA damage signaling and repair proteins accumulate at the lesion to respond to the damage and repair the DNA to form a continuous DNA helix.
0044454	name:Name:nuclear chromosome part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a nuclear chromosome, a chromosome found in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell.
0097047	name:Name:DNA replication termination region	name:Synonym:TER	info:Definition:A chromosomal region that contains fork pausing elements influencing the progression and merging of DNA replication forks.
0044428	name:Name:nuclear part	name:Synonym:nucleus component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the nucleus, a membrane-bounded organelle of eukaryotic cells in which chromosomes are housed and replicated.
0000228	name:Name:nuclear chromosome	name:Synonym:nuclear interphase chromosome	info:Definition:A chromosome found in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell.
0000943	name:Name:retrotransposon nucleocapsid	name:Synonym:Virus-like particle	name:Synonym:VLP	info:Definition:A complex of the retrotransposon RNA genome, reverse transcriptase, integrase, and associated molecules required for reproduction and integration of the retrotransposon into the host genome; the main structural molecule of the nucleocapsid is often a gag protein homolog.
0005652	name:Name:nuclear lamina	info:Definition:The fibrous, electron-dense layer lying on the nucleoplasmic side of the inner membrane of a cell nucleus, composed of lamin filaments. The polypeptides of the lamina are thought to be concerned in the dissolution of the nuclear envelope and its re-formation during mitosis. The lamina is composed of lamin A and lamin C filaments cross-linked into an orthogonal lattice, which is attached via lamin B to the inner nuclear membrane through interactions with a lamin B receptor, an IFAP, in the membrane.
0005654	name:Name:nucleoplasm	info:Definition:That part of the nuclear content other than the chromosomes or the nucleolus.
0016363	name:Name:nuclear matrix	name:Synonym:nucleoskeleton 	info:Definition:The dense fibrillar network lying on the inner side of the nuclear membrane.
0031380	name:Name:nuclear RNA-directed RNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:Rdr1 complex	name:Synonym:RDRC	info:Definition:A complex required for RNAi mediated heterochromatin assembly. In S. pombe this contains RNA-directed RNA polymerase, a putative helicase and a protein containing a pap25 associated domain.
0034399	name:Name:nuclear periphery	info:Definition:The portion of the nuclear lumen proximal to the inner nuclear membrane.
0034753	name:Name:nuclear aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex	name:Synonym:6S-nuclear aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor ligand-activated complex	name:Synonym:nuclear AhR complex	name:Synonym:nuclear AHRC	info:Definition:An aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) complex found in the nucleus; ; consists of ligand-bound AhR and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).
0034992	name:Name:microtubule organizing center attachment site	name:Synonym:MAS	name:Synonym:microtubule organising centre attachment site	name:Synonym:MTOC attachment site	info:Definition:A region of the nuclear envelope to which a microtubule organizing center (MTOC) attaches; protein complexes embedded in the nuclear envelope mediate direct or indirect linkages between the microtubule cytoskeleton and the nuclear envelope.
0035843	name:Name:endonuclear canal	info:Definition:A membrane-bound structure present in the nucleus of a spermatozoon. There is variation in the number of endonuclear canals between sperm of different organisms, and some species lack these structures altogether. The endonuclear canal may provide a supporting role for the sperm nucleus, and originates during spermiogenesis from an invagination of the nuclear envelope.
0042405	name:Name:nuclear inclusion body	info:Definition:An intranuclear focus at which aggregated proteins have been sequestered.
0044195	name:Name:nucleoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:nuclear channels	info:Definition:Long, dynamic tubular channels, formed by invagination of the nuclear envelope, that extend deep into the nucleoplasm. The channels have an underlying lamina and are implicated in functioning in signaling and transport.
0044451	name:Name:nucleoplasm part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the nucleoplasm, that part of the nuclear content other than the chromosomes or the nucleolus.
0044452	name:Name:nucleolar part	name:Synonym:nucleolus component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a nucleolus, a small, dense body one or more of which are present in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. It is rich in RNA and protein, is not bounded by a limiting membrane, and is not seen during mitosis.
0044453	name:Name:nuclear membrane part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the nuclear membrane, the envelope that surrounds the nucleus of eukaryotic cells.
0046808	name:Name:assemblon	info:Definition:Antigenically dense structures located at the periphery of nuclei, close to but not abutting nuclear membranes. Assemblons contain the proteins for immature-capsid assembly; they are located at the periphery of a diffuse structure composed of proteins involved in DNA synthesis, which overlaps only minimally with the assemblons. More than one site can be present simultaneously.
0046809	name:Name:replication compartment	info:Definition:Globular nuclear domains where the transcription and replication of the viral genome occurs. More than one site can be present simultaneously.
0046818	name:Name:dense nuclear body	info:Definition:A location in the host cell nucleus where viral proteins colocalize late in infection prior to the onset of viral DNA synthesis. More than one site can be present simultaneously.
0055029	name:Name:nuclear DNA-directed RNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:A protein complex, located in the nucleus, that possesses DNA-directed RNA polymerase activity.
0071687	name:Name:horsetail nucleus leading edge	info:Definition:The part of the horsetail nucleus where telomeres cluster under the SPB and that leads horsetail movement. The horsetail nucleus is the elongated nucleus which forms during the rapid oscillatory movement at meiotic prophase; characterized in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
0044429	name:Name:mitochondrial part	name:Synonym:mitochondrion component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a mitochondrion, a semiautonomous, self replicating organelle that occurs in varying numbers, shapes, and sizes in the cytoplasm of virtually all eukaryotic cells. It is notably the site of tissue respiration.
0000262	name:Name:mitochondrial chromosome	name:Synonym:mitochondrial DNA	name:Synonym:mitochondrial genome	name:Synonym:mtDNA	info:Definition:A chromosome found in the mitochondrion of a eukaryotic cell.
0005761	name:Name:mitochondrial ribosome	name:Synonym:55S ribosome, mitochondrial	info:Definition:A ribosome found in the mitochondrion of a eukaryotic cell; contains a characteristic set of proteins distinct from those of cytosolic ribosomes.
0005762	name:Name:mitochondrial large ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:39S ribosomal subunit, mitochondrial	info:Definition:The larger of the two subunits of a mitochondrial ribosome. Two sites on the ribosomal large subunit are involved in translation: the aminoacyl site (A site) and peptidyl site (P site).
0005763	name:Name:mitochondrial small ribosomal subunit	name:Synonym:28S ribosomal subunit, mitochondrial	name:Synonym:mitochondrial ribosomal small subunit complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial ribosomal SSU complex	info:Definition:The smaller of the two subunits of a mitochondrial ribosome.
0020023	name:Name:kinetoplast	info:Definition:A sub-structure within the large single mitochondrion of kinetoplastid parasites and which is closely associated with the flagellar pocket and basal body of the flagellum.
0034245	name:Name:mitochondrial DNA-directed RNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial RNA polymerase complex	name:Synonym:mitochondrial RNA polymerase holoenzyme complex	info:Definition:A DNA-directed RNA polymerase complex located in the mitochondrion. Mitochondrial RNA polymerase is composed of two subunits, a catalytic core, which resembles the enzymes from bacteriophage T7 and T3, and a specificity factor required for promoter recognition, which is similar to members of the eubacterial sigma factor family. In S. cerevisiae, these are encoded by the nuclear genes RPO41 and MTF1 and the specificity factor, required for promoter recognition and initiation, is not present in the elongating form.
0042645	name:Name:mitochondrial nucleoid	info:Definition:The region of a mitochondrion to which the DNA is confined.
0043294	name:Name:mitochondrial glutamate synthase complex (NADH)	info:Definition:A protein complex, found in the mitochondria, that in yeast consists of a large and a small subunit. Possesses glutamate synthase (NADH) activity.
0044284	name:Name:crista junction	info:Definition:Tubular structures of relatively uniform size that connect mitochondrial cristae to the inner mitchondrial membrane.
0044290	name:Name:mitochondrial intracristal space	info:Definition:The space bounded by the mitochondrial cristae membranes, continuous with the intermembrane space.
0044455	name:Name:mitochondrial membrane part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a mitochondrial membrane, either of the lipid bilayers that surround the mitochondrion and form the mitochondrial envelope.
0045025	name:Name:mitochondrial degradosome	name:Synonym:mtEXO	info:Definition:A mitochondrial protein complex with 3' to 5' exoribonuclease activity that participates in intron-independent turnover and processing of mitochondrial transcripts. In humans, the mitochondrial degradosome is a pentameric complex, and in yeast it exists as a heterodimer.
0044430	name:Name:cytoskeletal part	name:Synonym:cytoskeleton component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the cytoskeleton, a cellular scaffolding or skeleton that maintains cell shape, enables some cell motion (using structures such as flagella and cilia), and plays important roles in both intra-cellular transport (e.g. the movement of vesicles and organelles) and cellular division. Includes constituent parts of intermediate filaments, microfilaments, microtubules, and the microtrabecular lattice.
0000922	name:Name:spindle pole	info:Definition:Either of the ends of a spindle, where spindle microtubules are organized; usually contains a microtubule organizing center and accessory molecules, spindle microtubules and astral microtubules.
0002177	name:Name:manchette	info:Definition:A conical shaped array of microtubules that completely covers the nucleus of a spermatid, thought to be involved in sperm head elongation.
0005815	name:Name:microtubule organizing center	name:Synonym:microtubule organising centre	name:Synonym:MTOC	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic structure that can catalyze gamma-tubulin-dependent microtubule nucleation and that can anchor microtubules by interacting with their minus ends, plus ends or sides.
0005826	name:Name:actomyosin contractile ring	name:Synonym:actomyosin ring	name:Synonym:CAR	name:Synonym:constriction ring	name:Synonym:contractile actomyosin ring	name:Synonym:cytokinetic ring	info:Definition:A cytoskeletal structure composed of actin filaments and myosin that forms beneath the plasma membrane of many cells, including animal cells and yeast cells, in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the spindle, i.e. the cell division plane. Ring contraction is associated with centripetal growth of the membrane that divides the cytoplasm of the two daughter cells. In animal cells, the contractile ring is located inside the plasma membrane at the location of the cleavage furrow. In budding fungal cells, e.g. mitotic S. cerevisiae cells, the contractile ring forms beneath the plasma membrane at the mother-bud neck before mitosis.
0005862	name:Name:muscle thin filament tropomyosin	info:Definition:A form of the tropomyosin dimer found associated with actin and the troponin complex in muscle thin filaments.
0005865	name:Name:striated muscle thin filament	info:Definition:Filaments formed of actin and associated proteins; attached to Z discs at either end of sarcomeres in myofibrils.
0005940	name:Name:septin ring	info:Definition:A tight ring-shaped structure that forms in the division plane at the site of cytokinesis; composed of members of the conserved family of filament-forming proteins called septins as well as septin-associated proteins. This type of septin structure is observed at the bud neck of budding fungal cells, at the site of cell division in animal cells, at the junction between the mother cell and a pseudohyphal projection, and also within hyphae of filamentous fungi at sites where a septum will form.
0008091	name:Name:spectrin	info:Definition:Membrane associated dimeric protein (240 and 220 kDa) of erythrocytes. Forms a complex with ankyrin, actin and probably other components of the membrane cytoskeleton, so that there is a mesh of proteins underlying the plasma membrane, potentially restricting the lateral mobility of integral proteins.
0009574	name:Name:preprophase band	info:Definition:A dense band of microtubules, 1-3 pm wide, that appears just beneath the cell membrane before the start of cell division in the cells of higher plants. It precedes the onset of prophase and then disappears as mitosis begins, yet it somehow determines the plane of orientation of the new cell plate forming in late telophase and marks the zone of the parental cell wall where fusion with the growing cell plate ultimately occurs.
0014069	name:Name:postsynaptic density	name:Synonym:post synaptic density	name:Synonym:post-synaptic density	info:Definition:The post synaptic density is a region that lies adjacent to the cytoplasmic face of the postsynaptic membrane at excitatory synapse. It forms a disc that consists of a range of proteins with different functions, some of which contact the cytoplasmic domains of ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane. The proteins making up the disc include receptors, and structural proteins linked to the actin cytoskeleton. They also include signalling machinery, such as protein kinases and phosphatases.
0020010	name:Name:conoid	info:Definition:A spiral cytoskeletal structure located at the apical end of the apical complex in some apicomplexan parasites. Fibers form a left-handed spiral, and are comprised of tubulin protofilaments organized in a ribbon-like structure that differs from the conventional tubular structure characteristic of microtubules.
0020038	name:Name:subpellicular network	info:Definition:A mechanically stable cytoskeletal structure associated with the cytoplasmic face of the pellicle and surrounding the microtubule-based cytoskeleton.
0030478	name:Name:actin cap	info:Definition:Polarized accumulation of cytoskeletal proteins (including F-actin) and regulatory proteins in a cell. An example of this is the actin cap found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0030479	name:Name:actin cortical patch	name:Synonym:actin patch	info:Definition:A discrete actin-containing structure found at the plasma membrane in cells, at sites of endocytosis; formed of networks of branched actin filaments that lie just beneath the plasma membrane and assemble, move, and disassemble rapidly. An example of this is the actin cortical patch found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0030864	name:Name:cortical actin cytoskeleton	info:Definition:The portion of the actin cytoskeleton, comprising filamentous actin and associated proteins, that lies just beneath the plasma membrane.
0030981	name:Name:cortical microtubule cytoskeleton	info:Definition:The portion of the microtubule cytoskeleton that lies just beneath the plasma membrane.
0031002	name:Name:actin rod	info:Definition:A cellular structure consisting of parallel, hexagonally arranged actin tubules, comprising filamentous actin and associated proteins. Found in the germinating spores of Dictyostelium discoideum.
0031003	name:Name:actin tubule	info:Definition:A cellular structure, approximately 13 nm in diameter, consisting of three actin filaments bundled together.
0032123	name:Name:deep fiber	name:Synonym:deep fibre	info:Definition:Inward projections of the cytoskeletal structures of the oral apparatus, which form a fiber that extends past the cytostome into the cytoplasm.
0032158	name:Name:septin band	info:Definition:A diffuse ring composed of a series of septin bars that run parallel to the long axis of the cell. This type of septin structure has been observed in a number of locations associated with polarized grown and/or deposition of new membrane, but not with cytokinesis, such as at the shmoo (mating projection) neck, at the junction between the mother cell and the germ tube (hypha) of a fungal cell growing filamentously.
0032159	name:Name:septin cap	info:Definition:A faint structure formed of septins found at the leading edge of growth in germ tubes and hyphae in fungal cells growing filamentously. This cap of septins colocalizes with a region of the plasma membrane that is rich in ergosterol.
0032160	name:Name:septin filament array	name:Synonym:septin bar	info:Definition:Arrays of septin filaments, or bars, found in a series of filamentous structures. Such structures have been observed in the prospore membrane during spore formation in S. cerevisiae and in the chlamydospore membrane during chlamydospore formation in C. albicans.
0032161	name:Name:cleavage apparatus septin structure	info:Definition:Any of a series of structures composed of septins and septin-associated proteins localized to the cleavage plane which are involved in cytokinesis.
0032173	name:Name:septin collar	info:Definition:A tubular, hourglass-shaped structure composed of highly ordered arrays of septin filaments; in budding yeast cells, the septin collar forms from the initial septin ring by expanding into the daughter cell.
0032176	name:Name:split septin rings	info:Definition:A pair of rings that flank the site of cell division, formed by splitting of the septin ring (or collar) prior to cytokinesis; this double ring structure is thought to trap proteins needed for cytokinesis or the formation of the new membrane or cell wall between the two septin rings. Split septin rings are known to occur in budding yeast cells and probably occur in other cell types as well.
0032432	name:Name:actin filament bundle	name:Synonym:actin cable	info:Definition:An assembly of actin filaments that are on the same axis but may be oriented with the same or opposite polarities and may be packed with different levels of tightness.
0032437	name:Name:cuticular plate	info:Definition:A dense network of actin filaments found beneath the apical cell surface of hair cells, and into which stereocilia are inserted.
0033150	name:Name:cytoskeletal calyx	info:Definition:A large cytoskeletal structure located at the posterior end of the perinuclear theca of a mammalian sperm head. The nucleus is tightly associated with the calyx, which contains calicin and basic cylicin proteins.
0035253	name:Name:ciliary rootlet	info:Definition:A cytoskeleton-like structure, originating from the basal body at the proximal end of a cilium, and extending proximally toward the cell nucleus. Rootlets are typically 80-100 nm in diameter and contain cross striae distributed at regular intervals of approximately 55-70 nm.
0035371	name:Name:microtubule plus end	name:Synonym:growing microtubule plus end	name:Synonym:microtubule plus-end	info:Definition:The growing (plus) end of a microtubule. In vitro, microtubules polymerize more quickly at the plus end than at the minus end. In vivo, microtubule growth occurs only at the plus end, and the plus end switches between periods of growth and shortening, a behavior known as dynamic instability.
0042641	name:Name:actomyosin	name:Synonym:actomyosin complex	name:Synonym:actomyosin structure	info:Definition:Any complex of actin, myosin, and accessory proteins.
0044450	name:Name:microtubule organizing center part	name:Synonym:microtubule organizing centre component	name:Synonym:MTOC component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a microtubule organizing center, a region in a eukaryotic cell, such as a centrosome or basal body, from which microtubules grow.
0051233	name:Name:spindle midzone	name:Synonym:central spindle	name:Synonym:spindle equator	info:Definition:The area in the center of the spindle where the spindle microtubules from opposite poles overlap.
0070687	name:Name:macropinocytic cup cytoskeleton	name:Synonym:crown cytoskeleton	info:Definition:The part of the cortical actin cytoskeleton that forms part of a macropinocytic cup.
0070865	name:Name:investment cone	name:Synonym:F-actin cone	info:Definition:A cytoskeletal part that consists of a microfilament-rich cone that forms round each nucleus in a spermatogenic cyst and translocates the length of the cyst during sperm individualization.
0044431	name:Name:Golgi apparatus part	name:Synonym:Golgi component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the Golgi apparatus, a compound membranous cytoplasmic organelle of eukaryotic cells, consisting of flattened, ribosome-free vesicles arranged in a more or less regular stack.
0005795	name:Name:Golgi stack	name:Synonym:dictyosome	name:Synonym:Golgi cisternae	info:Definition:The set of thin, flattened membrane-bounded compartments, called cisternae, that form the central portion of the Golgi complex. The stack usually comprises cis, medial, and trans cisternae; the cis- and trans-Golgi networks are not considered part of the stack.
0005798	name:Name:Golgi-associated vesicle	name:Synonym:Golgi vesicle	info:Definition:Any vesicle associated with the Golgi complex and involved in mediating transport within the Golgi or between the Golgi and other parts of the cell.
0005801	name:Name:cis-Golgi network	name:Synonym:cis Golgi network	name:Synonym:forming face	name:Synonym:Golgi cis face	name:Synonym:Golgi cis-face	info:Definition:The network of interconnected tubular and cisternal structures located at the convex side of the Golgi apparatus, which abuts the endoplasmic reticulum.
0005802	name:Name:trans-Golgi network	name:Synonym:Golgi trans face	name:Synonym:Golgi trans-face	name:Synonym:late Golgi	name:Synonym:maturing face	name:Synonym:TGN	name:Synonym:trans Golgi network	info:Definition:The network of interconnected tubular and cisternal structures located at the side of the Golgi apparatus distal to the endoplasmic reticulum, from which secretory vesicles emerge. The trans-Golgi network is important in the later stages of protein secretion where it is thought to play a key role in the sorting and targeting of secreted proteins to the correct destination.
0030121	name:Name:AP-1 adaptor complex	name:Synonym:HA1	name:Synonym:HA1 clathrin adaptor	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of beta1, gamma, mu1 and sigma1 subunits and links clathrin to the membrane surface of a vesicle; vesicles with AP-1-containing coats are normally found primarily in the trans-Golgi network. In at least humans, the AP-1 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different genes (gamma1 and gamma2, mu1A and mu1B, and sigma1A, sigma1B and sigma1C).
0030126	name:Name:COPI vesicle coat	name:Synonym:coatomer	info:Definition:One of two multimeric complexes that forms a membrane vesicle coat. The mammalian COPI subunits are called alpha-, beta-, beta'-, gamma-, delta-, epsilon- and zeta-COP. Vesicles with COPI coats are found associated with Golgi membranes at steady state.
0030130	name:Name:clathrin coat of trans-Golgi network vesicle	name:Synonym:clathrin coat of TGN vesicle	info:Definition:A clathrin coat found on a vesicle of the trans-Golgi network.
0070931	name:Name:Golgi-associated vesicle lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the membrane of a Golgi-associated vesicle.
0044432	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum part	name:Synonym:ER component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the endoplasmic reticulum, the irregular network of unit membranes, visible only by electron microscopy, that occurs in the cytoplasm of many eukaryotic cells. The membranes form a complex meshwork of tubular channels, which are often expanded into slitlike cavities called cisternae.
0000835	name:Name:ER ubiquitin ligase complex	info:Definition:A ubiquitin ligase complex found in the ER.
0009510	name:Name:plasmodesmatal desmotubule	name:Synonym:desmotubule central rod	info:Definition:A tightly wound cylinder of membrane that is located within the plasmodesmal pore and runs the length of the plasmodesma. The desmotubule likely provides a rigid stability to plasmodesmata and confers a fixed diameter and pore size to the plasmodesmal canal, and is linked to the endoplasmic reticulum in each of the adjacent cell.
0009511	name:Name:plasmodesmatal endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:plasmodesmatal ER	info:Definition:Endoplasmic reticulum found in plasmodesmata, junctions connecting the cytoplasm of adjacent plant cells.
0014801	name:Name:longitudinal sarcoplasmic reticulum	info:Definition:The portion of the free sarcoplasmic reticulum consisting of longitudinal tubules that connect terminal cisternae.
0032541	name:Name:cortical endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:cortical ER	name:Synonym:peripheral endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:peripheral ER	info:Definition:A cortical network of highly dynamic tubules that are juxtaposed to the plasma membrane and undergo ring closure and tubule-branching movements.
0044322	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum quality control compartment	name:Synonym:ER quality control compartment	name:Synonym:ER-derived quality control compartment	name:Synonym:ERQC	info:Definition:A subcompartment of the endoplasmic reticulum in which proteins with improper or incorrect folding accumulate. Enzymes in this compartment direct proteins with major folding problems to translocation to the cytosol and degradation, and proteins with minor folding problems to the ER, to interact with chaperon proteins.
0070971	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum exit site	name:Synonym:ER exit site	name:Synonym:transitional ER	info:Definition:An endoplasmic reticulum part at which COPII-coated vesicles are produced.
0071781	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum cisternal network	name:Synonym:ER cisternal network	info:Definition:An endoplasmic reticulum part that comprises the membranes with low curvature in cross-section.
0071782	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum tubular network	name:Synonym:ER tubular network	info:Definition:An endoplasmic reticulum part that comprises the membranes with high curvature in cross-section.
0097038	name:Name:perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:perinuclear ER	info:Definition:The portion of endoplasmic reticulum, the intracellular network of tubules and cisternae, that occurs near the nucleus. The lumen of the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum is contiguous with the nuclear envelope lumen (also called perinuclear space), the region between the inner and outer nuclear membranes.
0044433	name:Name:cytoplasmic vesicle part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of cytoplasmic vesicle, a vesicle formed of membrane or protein, found in the cytoplasm of a cell.
0002079	name:Name:inner acrosomal membrane	info:Definition:The acrosomal membrane region that underlies the acrosomal vesicle and is located toward the sperm nucleus. This region is responsible for molecular interactions allowing the sperm to penetrate the zona pellucida and fuses with the egg plasma membrane.
0002081	name:Name:outer acrosomal membrane	info:Definition:The acrosomal membrane region that underlies the plasma membrane of the sperm. This membrane fuses with the sperm plasma membrane as part of the acrosome reaction.
0030122	name:Name:AP-2 adaptor complex	name:Synonym:HA2	name:Synonym:HA2 clathrin adaptor	info:Definition:A heterotetrameric AP-type membrane coat adaptor complex that consists of alpha, beta2, mu2 and sigma2 subunits, and links clathrin to the membrane surface of a vesicle; vesicles with AP-2-containing coats are normally found primarily near the plasma membrane, on endocytic vesicles. In at least humans, the AP-2 complex can be heterogeneric due to the existence of multiple subunit isoforms encoded by different alpha genes (alphaA and alphaC).
0030285	name:Name:integral to synaptic vesicle membrane	info:Definition:Penetrating at least one phospholipid bilayer of a synaptic vesicle membrane. May also refer to the state of being buried in the bilayer with no exposure outside the bilayer.
0031311	name:Name:intrinsic to contractile vacuolar membrane	info:Definition:Located in the contractile vacuolar membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0033172	name:Name:gas vesicle shell	name:Synonym:gas vesicle membrane	name:Synonym:gas vesicle wall	info:Definition:The proteinaceous structure surrounding a gas vesicle.
0043159	name:Name:acrosomal matrix	info:Definition:A structural framework, or 'dense core' at the interior of an acrosome. May regulate the distribution of hydrolases within the acrosome and their release during the acrosome reaction.
0043662	name:Name:peribacteroid fluid	info:Definition:The soluble material inside the peribacteroid membrane, but outside of the bacteroid, within a bacteroid-containing symbiosome.
0070115	name:Name:organellar chromatophore intermembrane space	name:Synonym:Paulinella-type chromatophore intermembrane space	info:Definition:The region between the inner and outer lipid bilayers that surround an organellar chromatophore.
0070116	name:Name:organellar chromatophore thylakoid	name:Synonym:Paulinella-type chromatophore thylakoid	info:Definition:A thylakoid located in an organellar chromatophore.
0070117	name:Name:organellar chromatophore thylakoid lumen	name:Synonym:Paulinella-type chromatophore thylakoid lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by an organellar chromatophore thylakoid membrane.
0070118	name:Name:organellar chromatophore thylakoid membrane	name:Synonym:Paulinella-type chromatophore thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer membrane of any thylakoid within an organellar chromatophore.
0044435	name:Name:plastid part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a plastid, a member of a family of organelles found in the cytoplasm of plants and some protists, which are membrane-bounded and contain DNA. Plant plastids develop from a common type, the proplastid.
0000311	name:Name:plastid large ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The larger of the two subunits of a plastid ribosome. Two sites on the ribosomal large subunit are involved in translation: the aminoacyl site (A site) and peptidyl site (P site).
0000312	name:Name:plastid small ribosomal subunit	info:Definition:The smaller of the two subunits of a plastid ribosome.
0000427	name:Name:plastid-encoded plastid RNA polymerase complex	info:Definition:An RNA polymerase complex containing polypeptides encoded by the plastid genome. Plastid-encoded DNA-directed RNA polymerases resemble eubacterial multisubunit RNA polymerases, with a core composed of alpha, beta, and beta-prime subunits. Some forms contain multiple additional subunits. An additional sigma factor subunit is required for promoter recognition.
0009508	name:Name:plastid chromosome	info:Definition:A circular DNA molecule containing plastid encoded genes.
0009532	name:Name:plastid stroma	info:Definition:The proteinaceous ground substance of plastids.
0009541	name:Name:etioplast prolamellar body	info:Definition:A three dimensional regular lattice found in etioplasts. It is composed of a continuous system of tubules but when exposed to light the symmetrical arrangement is rapidly lost as tubules become pinched off into two dimensional sections of lattice. These for perforated sheets of membrane that move apart, extend and increase, finally establishing the typical granal and intergranal lamellae of the mature chloroplast.
0009547	name:Name:plastid ribosome	info:Definition:A ribosome contained within a plastid.
0010319	name:Name:stromule	name:Synonym:Stroma-filled tubule	info:Definition:Thin filamentous structure extending from the surface of all plastid types examined so far, including chloroplast, proplastid, etioplast, leucoplast, amyloplast, and chromoplast. In general, stromules are more abundant in tissues containing non-green plastids, and in cells containing smaller plastids. The primary function of stromules is still unresolved, although the presence of stromules markedly increases the plastid surface area, potentially increasing transport to and from the cytosol. Other functions of stromules, such as transfer of macromolecules between plastids and starch granule formation in cereal endosperm, may be restricted to particular tissues and cell types.
0030679	name:Name:cyanelle ribonuclease P complex	name:Synonym:cyanelle RNase P complex	info:Definition:A ribonuclease P complex located in the cyanelle, where it catalyzes the 5' endonucleolytic cleavage of precursor tRNAs to yield mature tRNAs. The best characterized cyanelle ribonuclease P complex, from the alga Cyanophora paradoxa, contains a single RNA molecule that is necessary but not sufficient for catalysis, and several protein molecules.
0031009	name:Name:plastid ADPG pyrophosphorylase complex	info:Definition:An ADPG pyrophosphorylase complex found in a plastid.
0031351	name:Name:integral to plastid membrane	info:Definition:Penetrating at least one phospholipid bilayer of a plastid membrane. May also refer to the state of being buried in the bilayer with no exposure outside the bilayer.
0031978	name:Name:plastid thylakoid lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by a plastid thylakoid membrane.
0035449	name:Name:extrinsic to plastid thylakoid membrane	name:Synonym:peripheral to plastid thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of a plastid thylakoid membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0042646	name:Name:plastid nucleoid	info:Definition:The region of a plastid to which the DNA is confined.
0043036	name:Name:starch grain	name:Synonym:starch granule	info:Definition:Plant storage body for amylose and amylopectin, 1-100um in diameter. Also contains small amounts of enzymes, amino acids, lipids and nucleic acids. The shape of the grain varies widely amongst species, but is often spherical or disk-shaped.
0044434	name:Name:chloroplast part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a chloroplast, a chlorophyll-containing plastid with thylakoids organized into grana and frets, or stroma thylakoids, and embedded in a stroma.
0055035	name:Name:plastid thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer membrane of any thylakoid within a plastid.
0044437	name:Name:vacuolar part	name:Synonym:vacuole component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a vacuole, a closed structure, found only in eukaryotic cells, that is completely surrounded by unit membrane and contains liquid material.
0000220	name:Name:vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V0 domain	name:Synonym:vacuolar hydrogen ion-transporting ATPase V0 domain	info:Definition:The V0 domain of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase found in the vacuolar membrane.
0000221	name:Name:vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V1 domain	name:Synonym:vacuolar hydrogen ion-transporting ATPase V1 domain	info:Definition:The V1 domain of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase found in the vacuolar membrane.
0000327	name:Name:lytic vacuole within protein storage vacuole	info:Definition:A membrane-bounded compartment containing crystals of phytic acid and proteins characteristic of a lytic vacuole, found within a storage vacuole.
0016471	name:Name:vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:vacuolar hydrogen-translocating V-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex found in the vacuolar membrane, where it acts as a proton pump to mediate acidification of the vacuolar lumen.
0090123	name:Name:lysosomal glycocalyx	info:Definition:The polysaccharide-based coating on the inner side of a lysosomal membrane that protects it from digestion by lysosomal enzymes.
0044438	name:Name:microbody part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a microbody, a cytoplasmic organelle, spherical or oval in shape, that is bounded by a single membrane and contains oxidative enzymes, especially those utilizing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
0044439	name:Name:peroxisomal part	name:Synonym:peroxisome component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a peroxisome, a small, membrane-bounded organelle that uses dioxygen (O2) to oxidize organic molecules; contains some enzymes that produce and others that degrade hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
0044440	name:Name:endosomal part	name:Synonym:endosome component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of an endosome, a membrane-bounded organelle to which materials ingested by endocytosis are delivered.
0010009	name:Name:external side of endosome membrane	info:Definition:The external (cytoplasmic face) of an endosome membrane.
0044441	name:Name:cilium part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a cilium, a specialized eukaryotic organelle that consists of a filiform extrusion of the cell surface. Each cilium is bounded by an extrusion of the cytoplasmic membrane, and contains a regular longitudinal array of microtubules, anchored basally in a centriole.
0035869	name:Name:ciliary transition zone	info:Definition:A region of the cilium between the basal body and proximal segment that is characterized by Y-shaped assemblages that connect axonemal microtubules to the ciliary membrane. The ciliary transition zone appears to function as a gate that controls ciliary membrane composition.
0042622	name:Name:photoreceptor outer segment membrane	info:Definition:The membrane surrounding the outer segment of a vertebrate photoreceptor.
0060170	name:Name:cilium membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a cilium.
0044442	name:Name:microtubule-based flagellum part	name:Synonym:flagellar part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a microtubule-based flagellum, a long, whiplike protrusion from the surface of a eukaryotic cell, whose undulations drive the cell through a liquid medium; similar in structure to a cilium. The flagellum is based on a 9+2 arrangement of microtubules. Examples of this component are found in Mus musculus.
0020016	name:Name:flagellar pocket	info:Definition:Invagination of the plasma membrane from which a flagellum protrudes.
0035686	name:Name:flagellar fibrous sheath	name:Synonym:flagellum fibrous sheath	info:Definition:A cytoskeletal structure surrounding the axoneme and outer dense fibers of the sperm flagellum. Consists of two longitudinal columns connected by closely arrayed semicircular ribs that assemble from distal to proximal throughout spermiogenesis. The fibrous sheath probably influences the degree of flexibility, plane of flagellar motion, and the shape of the flagellar beat.
0097014	name:Name:microtubule-based flagellar cytoplasm	name:Synonym:microtubule-based flagellar matrix	name:Synonym:microtubule-based flagellum cytoplasm	name:Synonym:microtubule-based flagellum matrix	info:Definition:All of the contents of a microtubule-based flagellum, excluding the plasma membrane surrounding the flagellum.
0044443	name:Name:pilus part	name:Synonym:fimbrial part	name:Synonym:fimbrium component	name:Synonym:pilus component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a pilus, a proteinaceous hair-like appendage on the surface of bacteria ranging from 2-8 nm in diameter.
0009418	name:Name:pilus shaft	name:Synonym:fimbrial shaft	info:Definition:The long, slender, mid section of a pilus.
0009419	name:Name:pilus tip	name:Synonym:fimbrial tip	info:Definition:The pointed extremity furthest from the cell of a pilus.
0044447	name:Name:axoneme part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of an axoneme, the bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of cilia and flagella in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for their movements.
0001520	name:Name:outer dense fiber	name:Synonym:outer dense fibre	info:Definition:Structure or material found in the flagella of mammalian sperm that surrounds each of the nine microtubule doublets, giving a 9 + 9 + 2 arrangement rather than the 9 + 2 pattern usually seen. These dense fibers are stiff and noncontractile.
0005858	name:Name:axonemal dynein complex	name:Synonym:axonemal dynein heavy chain	name:Synonym:axonemal dynein intermediate chain	name:Synonym:axonemal dynein intermediate light chain	name:Synonym:axonemal dynein light chain	info:Definition:A dynein complex found in eukaryotic cilia and flagella; the motor domain heads interact with adjacent microtubules to generate a sliding force which is converted to a bending motion. May contain two or three dynein heavy chains as well as several light chains.
0071808	name:Name:satellite fibril	info:Definition:An axoneme part that is found in the flagella of mammalian sperm and is located in the middle piece between the outer dense fibers (on the concave side of outer dense fibers as seen in cross-section).
0044449	name:Name:contractile fiber part	name:Synonym:contractile fibre component	name:Synonym:muscle fiber component	name:Synonym:muscle fibre component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a contractile fiber, a fiber composed of actin, myosin, and associated proteins, found in cells of smooth or striated muscle.
0005859	name:Name:muscle myosin complex	info:Definition:A filament of myosin found in a muscle cell of any type.
0005863	name:Name:striated muscle myosin thick filament	info:Definition:Bipolar filaments formed of polymers of a muscle-specific myosin II isoform, found in the middle of sarcomeres in myofibrils.
0014705	name:Name:C zone	info:Definition:A region of the A band in which myosin-binding protein C is located and that can be seen by electron microscopy. This is a functional zone that also includes myosin.
0030017	name:Name:sarcomere	info:Definition:The repeating unit of a myofibril in a muscle cell, composed of an array of overlapping thick and thin filaments between two adjacent Z discs.
0030018	name:Name:Z disc	name:Synonym:Z band	name:Synonym:Z disk	name:Synonym:Z line	info:Definition:Platelike region of a muscle sarcomere to which the plus ends of actin filaments are attached.
0030485	name:Name:smooth muscle contractile fiber	name:Synonym:smooth muscle fiber	name:Synonym:smooth muscle fibre	info:Definition:The contractile fiber of smooth muscle cells.
0030486	name:Name:smooth muscle dense body	info:Definition:Electron-dense region associated with a smooth muscle contractile fiber.
0031430	name:Name:M band	name:Synonym:M disc	name:Synonym:M line	name:Synonym:mesophragma	name:Synonym:midline	info:Definition:The midline of aligned thick filaments in a sarcomere; location of specific proteins that link thick filaments. Depending on muscle type the M band consists of different numbers of M lines.
0031672	name:Name:A band	name:Synonym:A disc	name:Synonym:anisotropic disc	name:Synonym:Q disc	name:Synonym:transverse disc	info:Definition:The dark-staining region of a sarcomere, in which myosin thick filaments are present; the center is traversed by the paler H zone, which in turn contains the M line.
0031673	name:Name:H zone	name:Synonym:H band	name:Synonym:H disc	info:Definition:A relatively pale zone traversing the center of the A band of a sarcomere, visible in relaxed muscle fibers; consists of the central portion of thick (myosin) filaments that are not overlapped by thin (actin) filaments.
0031674	name:Name:I band	name:Synonym:I disc	name:Synonym:isotropic disc	name:Synonym:J disc	info:Definition:A region of a sarcomere that appears as a light band on each side of the Z disc, comprising a region of the sarcomere where thin (actin) filaments are not overlapped by thick (myosin) filaments; contains actin, troponin, and tropomyosin; each sarcomere includes half of an I band at each end.
0043034	name:Name:costamere	info:Definition:Regular periodic sub membranous arrays of vinculin in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells, these arrays link Z-discs to the sarcolemma and are associated with links to extracellular matrix.
0055120	name:Name:striated muscle dense body	info:Definition:A vinculin-containing myofibril attachment structure of striated muscle that connects sarcomeres to the extracellular matrix. In nematode body wall muscle, the dense body performs the dual role of Z-disk and costamere.
0044460	name:Name:flagellum part	name:Synonym:flagellum component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a flagellum, a long whiplike or feathery structure borne either singly or in groups by the motile cells of many bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes and by the motile male gametes of many eukaryotic organisms, which propel the cell through a liquid medium.
0044461	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum part	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of flagellum, a 20 nm diameter filament composed of subunits of flagellin driven passively at its base by a motor powered by the transmembrane proton potential. Examples of this component are found in bacterial species.
0009420	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum filament	name:Synonym:flagellar filament	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum filament	info:Definition:The long (approximately 20 nm), thin external structure of the flagellum, which acts as a propeller. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009421	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum filament cap	name:Synonym:flagellar filament cap	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum filament cap	info:Definition:The proteinaceous structure at the distal tip of the flagellar filament. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009422	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum hook-filament junction	name:Synonym:flagellar hook-filament junction	info:Definition:The region of the flagellum where the hook and filament meet. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009424	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum hook	name:Synonym:flagellar hook	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum hook	info:Definition:The portion of the flagellum that connects the filament to the basal body. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009425	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body	info:Definition:One of the three major substructures of the flagellin-based flagellum; a structure consisting of a rod, a series of rings, the Mot proteins, the switch complex and the flagellum-specific export apparatus. The rings anchor the flagellum to the cytoplasmic membrane (MS ring), the peptidoglycan (P ring) and the outer membrane (L ring). Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009426	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, distal rod	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, distal rod	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, distal rod	info:Definition:The portion of the central rod of the flagellar basal body that is distal to the cell membrane; spans most of the distance between the inner and outer membranes. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009427	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, distal rod, L ring	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, distal rod, L ring	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, distal rod, L ring	info:Definition:One of the rings of the flagellar basal body; anchors the basal body to the outer membrane. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009428	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, distal rod, P ring	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, distal rod, P ring	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, distal rod, P ring	info:Definition:One of the rings of the flagellar basal body; anchors the basal body to the peptidoglycan layer. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009429	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, proximal rod	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, proximal rod	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, proximal rod	info:Definition:The portion of the central rod of the flagellar basal body that is proximal to the cell membrane; proximal rod connects the distal rod to the flagellar motor. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009431	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, MS ring	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, mounting plate	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, MS ring	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, MS ring	info:Definition:One of the rings of the flagellar basal body; a double-flanged ring that anchors the basal body to the cytoplasmic membrane. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0009433	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, C ring	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, C ring	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, C ring	info:Definition:Cytoplasmic ring located at the base of the flagellar basal body; acts as a rotor; includes three switch proteins, which generate torque and can change their conformational state in a bimodal fashion, so that the motor direction can switch between clockwise and counterclockwise. Examples of this component are found in bacteria.
0030694	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellum basal body, rod	name:Synonym:flagellar basal body, rod	name:Synonym:flagellin-based flagellum basal body, rod	info:Definition:The central portion of the flagellar basal body, which spans the periplasm and threads through the rings. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0097015	name:Name:bacterial-type flagellar cytoplasm	name:Synonym:bacterial-type flagellum cytoplasm	info:Definition:All of the contents of a bacterial-type flagellum, excluding the plasma membrane surrounding the flagellum.
0048493	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived thylakoid ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:plasma membrane ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex	name:Synonym:RubisCO complex	info:Definition:A complex, located in the plasma membrane-derived thylakoid, containing either both large and small subunits or just small subunits. It carries out the activity of producing 3-phosphoglycerate from carbon dioxide and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate.
0060091	name:Name:kinocilium	info:Definition:A nonmotile primary cilium that is found at the apical surface of auditory receptor cells. The kinocilium is surrounded by actin-based stereocilia.
0060171	name:Name:stereocilium membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a stereocilium.
0044423	name:Name:virion part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a virion, a complete fully infectious extracellular virus particle.
0019013	name:Name:viral nucleocapsid	name:Synonym:core	name:Synonym:nucleocapsid	info:Definition:The complete protein-nucleic acid complex that is the packaged form of the genome in a virus particle.
0019015	name:Name:viral genome	info:Definition:The whole of the genetic information of a virus, contained as either DNA or RNA.
0019016	name:Name:non-segmented viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome that consists of one continuous nucleic acid molecule.
0019017	name:Name:segmented viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome that is divided into two or more physically separate molecules of nucleic acid and packaged into a single virion.
0019018	name:Name:bipartite viral genome	info:Definition:A segmented viral genome consisting of two sub-genomic nucleic acids but each nucleic acid is packaged into a different virion.
0019019	name:Name:tripartite viral genome	info:Definition:A segmented viral genome consisting of three sub-genomic nucleic acids but each nucleic acid is packaged into a different virion.
0019020	name:Name:multipartite viral genome	info:Definition:A segmented viral genome consisting of more than three sub-genomic nucleic acids but each nucleic acid is packaged into a different virion.
0019021	name:Name:DNA viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome composed of deoxyribonucleic acid.
0019022	name:Name:RNA viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome composed of ribonucleic acid. This results in genome replication and expression of genetic information being inextricably linked.
0019023	name:Name:dsRNA viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome composed of double stranded RNA.
0019024	name:Name:ssRNA viral genome	info:Definition:A viral genome composed of single stranded RNA of either positive or negative sense.
0019028	name:Name:viral capsid	info:Definition:The protein coat that surrounds the infective nucleic acid in some virus particles. It comprises numerous regularly arranged subunits, or capsomeres.
0019029	name:Name:helical viral capsid	info:Definition:The protein coat that surrounds the infective nucleic acid in some virus particles; the subunits are arranged to form a protein helix with the genetic material contained within. Tobacco mosaic virus has such a capsid structure.
0019030	name:Name:icosahedral viral capsid	name:Synonym:quasispherical viral capsid	info:Definition:The protein coat that surrounds the infective nucleic acid in some virus particles; the subunits are arranged to form an icosahedron, a solid with 20 faces and 12 vertices. Tobacco satellite necrosis virus has such a capsid structure.
0019031	name:Name:viral envelope	name:Synonym:viral glycoprotein	name:Synonym:viral membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer and associated glycoproteins that surround many types of virus particle.
0019033	name:Name:viral tegument	info:Definition:A structure lying between the capsid and envelope of a virus, varying in thickness and often distributed asymmetrically.
0046727	name:Name:capsomere	name:Synonym:capsomer	info:Definition:Any of the protein subunits that comprise the closed shell or coat (capsid) of certain viruses.
0046729	name:Name:viral procapsid	info:Definition:A stable empty viral capsid produced during the assembly of viruses.
0055036	name:Name:virion membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a virion.
0044456	name:Name:synapse part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a synapse, the junction between a nerve fiber of one neuron and another neuron or muscle fiber or glial cell.
0008021	name:Name:synaptic vesicle	info:Definition:A secretory organelle, some 50 nm in diameter, of presynaptic nerve terminals; accumulates in high concentrations of neurotransmitters and is secreted these into the synaptic cleft by fusion with the 'active zone' of the presynaptic plasma membrane.
0030129	name:Name:clathrin coat of synaptic vesicle	info:Definition:A clathrin coat found on a synaptic vesicle.
0030672	name:Name:synaptic vesicle membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer surrounding a synaptic vesicle.
0034592	name:Name:synaptic vesicle lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by the synaptic vesicle membrane.
0043195	name:Name:terminal button	name:Synonym:bouton	name:Synonym:presynaptic bouton	name:Synonym:synaptic bouton	name:Synonym:terminal bouton	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters. The axon terminus is considered to be the whole region of thickening and the terminal button is a specialized region of it.
0061174	name:Name:type I terminal button	name:Synonym:type I terminal bouton	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon of a glutamatergic neuron, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters that will induce the contraction of muscle. The axon terminus is considered to be the whole region of thickening and the terminal button is a specialized region of it.
0061176	name:Name:type Ib terminal button	name:Synonym:type Ib terminal bouton	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon of a glutamatergic neuron, containing the specialized apparatus necessary for the tonic release neurotransmitters that will induce the contraction of muscle. Type Ib terminal buttons are larger than type Is terminal buttons.
0061177	name:Name:type Is terminal button	name:Synonym:type Is terminal bouton	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon of a glutamatergic neuron, containing the specialized apparatus necessary for the phasic release neurotransmitters that will induce the contraction of muscle. Type Is terminal buttons are smaller than type Ib terminal buttons.
0061175	name:Name:type II terminal button	name:Synonym:type II terminal bouton	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon of a non-glutamatergic neuron, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters at a regulatory synapse. The axon terminus is considered to be the whole region of thickening and the terminal button is a specialized region of it.
0048786	name:Name:presynaptic active zone	name:Synonym:pre-synaptic active zone	info:Definition:A specialized region of the plasma membrane and cell cortex of a presynaptic neuron; encompasses a region of the plasma membrane where synaptic vesicles dock and fuse, synaptic vesicles, and a specialized cortical cytoskeletal matrix.
0048788	name:Name:presynaptic cytoskeletal matrix assembled at active zones	name:Synonym:CAZ	name:Synonym:pre-synaptic cytoskeletal matrix assembled at active zones	name:Synonym:presynaptic cytomatrix assembled at active zones	name:Synonym:presynaptic dense body	name:Synonym:synaptic ribbon	name:Synonym:T-bar	name:Synonym:T-bar ribbon	info:Definition:The specialized cytoskeletal matrix assembled at the active zones of the presynaptic nerve terminal. The cytoskeletal matrix is a proteinaceous structure involved in organizing synaptic events such as immobilisation or translocation of synaptic vesicles, and assembling active zone components. The cytomatrix protein exclusively assembled at active zones, is thought to form a molecular scaffold that organizes neurotransmitter release sites.
0097060	name:Name:synaptic membrane	info:Definition:A specialized area of membrane on either the presynaptic or the postsynaptic side of a synapse, the junction between a nerve fiber of one neuron and another neuron or muscle fiber or glial cell.
0042734	name:Name:presynaptic membrane	info:Definition:A specialized area of membrane of the axon terminal that faces the plasma membrane of the neuron or muscle fiber with which the axon terminal establishes a synaptic junction; many synaptic junctions exhibit structural presynaptic characteristics, such as conical, electron-dense internal protrusions, that distinguish it from the remainder of the axon plasma membrane.
0048787	name:Name:presynaptic active zone membrane	name:Synonym:active zone plasma membrane	name:Synonym:active zone pre-synaptic plasma membrane	name:Synonym:active zone presynaptic plasma membrane	name:Synonym:pre-synaptic active zone membrane	info:Definition:The membrane portion of the presynaptic active zone; it is the site where docking and fusion of synaptic vesicles occurs for the release of neurotransmitters.
0045211	name:Name:postsynaptic membrane	name:Synonym:post-synaptic membrane	info:Definition:A specialized area of membrane facing the presynaptic membrane on the tip of the nerve ending and separated from it by a minute cleft (the synaptic cleft). Neurotransmitters across the synaptic cleft and transmit the signal to the postsynaptic membrane.
0044464	name:Name:cell part	name:Synonym:protoplast	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a cell, the basic structural and functional unit of all organisms.
0000267	name:Name:cell fraction	info:Definition:A generic term for parts of cells prepared by disruptive biochemical techniques.
0001950	name:Name:plasma membrane enriched fraction	name:Synonym:PME fraction	info:Definition:The fraction of cells, prepared by disruptive biochemical methods, that is enriched for plasma membranes.
0005625	name:Name:soluble fraction	name:Synonym:soluble	info:Definition:That fraction of cells, prepared by disruptive biochemical methods, that is soluble in water.
0005626	name:Name:insoluble fraction	name:Synonym:particle-bound	info:Definition:That fraction of cells, prepared by disruptive biochemical methods, that is not soluble in water.
0005624	name:Name:membrane fraction	info:Definition:That fraction of cells, prepared by disruptive biochemical methods, that includes the plasma and other membranes.
0001917	name:Name:photoreceptor inner segment	info:Definition:The inner segment of a vertebrate photoreceptor containing mitochondria, ribosomes and membranes where opsin molecules are assembled and passed to be part of the outer segment discs.
0002139	name:Name:stereocilia coupling link	info:Definition:A structure involved in coupling stereocilia to one another in sensory hair cells There are four morphologically distinct types: tip links, horizontal top connectors, shaft connectors and ankle links. Tip links and horizontal top connectors are the only inter-stereocilia links associated with mature cochlea, whereas ankle links appear during development of the auditory hair bundle.
0002140	name:Name:stereocilia tip link	info:Definition:A stereocilia link that is formed by a fine filament running more or less vertically upward from the tip of each shorter stereocilium to attach at a higher point on its adjacent taller neighbor. Tilting the bundle puts tension on the filaments, which pull on mechanically gated ion channels in the membrane of the stereocilia.
0002141	name:Name:stereocilia ankle link	info:Definition:A stereocilia coupling link that is composed of a fine filament present in developing stereocilia that couples the bases of individual stereocilia to one another. They are not present in mature stereocilia.
0005622	name:Name:intracellular	name:Synonym:internal to cell	name:Synonym:nucleocytoplasm	name:Synonym:protoplasm	name:Synonym:protoplast	info:Definition:The living contents of a cell; the matter contained within (but not including) the plasma membrane, usually taken to exclude large vacuoles and masses of secretory or ingested material. In eukaryotes it includes the nucleus and cytoplasm.
0005933	name:Name:cellular bud	info:Definition:A protuberance from a cell of an organism that reproduces by budding, which will grow larger and become a separate daughter cell after nuclear division, cytokinesis, and cell wall formation (when appropriate). The daughter cell may completely separate from the mother cell, or the mother and daughter cells may remain associated.
0009930	name:Name:longitudinal side of cell surface	info:Definition:The side of the cell parallel to the zygotic axis.
0009986	name:Name:cell surface	name:Synonym:cell associated	name:Synonym:cell bound	info:Definition:The external part of the cell wall and/or plasma membrane.
0012505	name:Name:endomembrane system	info:Definition:A collection of membranous structures involved in transport within the cell. The main components of the endomembrane system are endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi bodies, vesicles, cell membrane and nuclear envelope. Members of the endomembrane system pass materials through each other or though the use of vesicles.
0016020	name:Name:membrane	info:Definition:Double layer of lipid molecules that encloses all cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins.
0005628	name:Name:prospore membrane	name:Synonym:ascospore-type prospore membrane	name:Synonym:forespore membrane	name:Synonym:FSM	info:Definition:The prospore membrane is a double-membraned structure that extends from the cytoplasmic face of the spindle pole bodies to encompass the spindle pole bodies and the four nuclear lobes that are formed during meiosis. It helps isolate the meiotic nuclei from the cytoplasm during spore formation and serves as a foundation for the formation of the spore walls. An example of this component is found in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
0005886	name:Name:plasma membrane	name:Synonym:bacterial inner membrane	name:Synonym:cell membrane	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic membrane	name:Synonym:inner endospore membrane	name:Synonym:juxtamembrane	name:Synonym:plasma membrane lipid bilayer	name:Synonym:plasmalemma	info:Definition:The membrane surrounding a cell that separates the cell from its external environment. It consists of a phospholipid bilayer and associated proteins.
0042383	name:Name:sarcolemma	info:Definition:The outer membrane of a muscle cell, consisting of the plasma membrane, a covering basement membrane (about 100 nm thick and sometimes common to more than one fiber), and the associated loose network of collagen fibers.
0019867	name:Name:outer membrane	info:Definition:The external membrane of Gram-negative bacteria or certain organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts; freely permeable to most ions and metabolites.
0009279	name:Name:cell outer membrane	name:Synonym:outer membrane of cell	info:Definition:A lipid bilayer that forms the outermost layer of the cell envelope; enriched in polysaccharide and protein; the outer leaflet of the membrane contains specific lipopolysaccharide structures.
0043594	name:Name:outer endospore membrane	info:Definition:The outer membrane around a bacterial endospore, located between the endospore cortex and endospore coat.
0034045	name:Name:pre-autophagosomal structure membrane	name:Synonym:isolation membrane	name:Synonym:PAS membrane	name:Synonym:phagophore	info:Definition:A cellular membrane associated with the pre-autophagosomal structure.
0034357	name:Name:photosynthetic membrane	info:Definition:A membrane enriched in complexes formed of reaction centers, accessory pigments and electron carriers, in which photosynthetic reactions take place.
0042651	name:Name:thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:The pigmented membrane of any thylakoid.
0042717	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived chromatophore membrane	info:Definition:The lipid bilayer associated with a plasma membrane-derived chromatophore; surrounds chromatophores that form complete vesicles.
0042175	name:Name:nuclear outer membrane-endoplasmic reticulum membrane network	name:Synonym:NE-ER continuum	name:Synonym:NE-ER network	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope-endoplasmic reticulum continuum	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope-endoplasmic reticulum network	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope-ER network	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane-endoplasmic reticulum continuum	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane-ER network	info:Definition:The continuous network of membranes encompassing the nuclear outer membrane and the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
0048475	name:Name:coated membrane	info:Definition:A single or double lipid bilayer with any of several different proteinaceous coats that can associate with membranes. Membrane coats include those formed by clathrin plus an adaptor complex, the COPI and COPII complexes.
0060342	name:Name:photoreceptor inner segment membrane	info:Definition:The membrane surrounding the outer segment of a vertebrate photoreceptor. The photoreceptor inner segment contains mitochondria, ribosomes and membranes where opsin molecules are assembled and passed to be part of the outer segment discs.
0020007	name:Name:apical complex	info:Definition:A group of cytoskeletal structures and associated membrane-bounded organelles found at the anterior end of adult obligate intracellular protozoan parasites in the phylum Apicomplexa. The apical complex is involved in attachment to and penetration of the host cell, and in parasite proliferation.
0020008	name:Name:rhoptry	name:Synonym:paired organelles	name:Synonym:toxoneme	info:Definition:A large, club-shaped secretory organelle that forms part of the apical complex of an apicomplexan parasite, and consists of a bulbous body and a narrow electron-dense neck that extends through the conoid at the apical tip of the parasite. The rhoptry necks serve as ducts through which the contents of the rhoptries are secreted after attachment to the host has been completed and at the commencement of invasion. Rhoptry proteins function in the biogenesis and host organellar association of the parasitophorous vacuole.
0020031	name:Name:polar ring of apical complex	name:Synonym:anterior polar ring of apical complex	name:Synonym:upper polar ring of apical complex	info:Definition:An electron dense ring at the most anterior position of the apical complex, from which the conoid fibers originate; formed during an invasive life cycle stage of an apicomplexan parasite.
0020032	name:Name:basal ring of apical complex	name:Synonym:lower polar ring of apical complex	name:Synonym:posterior polar ring of apical complex	name:Synonym:preconoidal ring of apical complex	info:Definition:An electron dense ring at the most posterior position of the apical complex, from which the subpellicular microtubules originate; formed during an invasive life cycle stage of an apicomplexan parasite.
0020039	name:Name:pellicle	info:Definition:The structure enclosing an apicomplexan parasite cell; consists of the cell membrane with its associated infrastructure of microtubules, microfilaments and other organelles.
0030312	name:Name:external encapsulating structure	info:Definition:A structure that lies outside the plasma membrane and surrounds the entire cell.
0005618	name:Name:cell wall	info:Definition:The rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal, and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis. In plants it is made of cellulose and, often, lignin; in fungi it is composed largely of polysaccharides; in bacteria it is composed of peptidoglycan.
0009274	name:Name:peptidoglycan-based cell wall	name:Synonym:envelope	name:Synonym:murein sacculus	name:Synonym:peptidoglycan	info:Definition:A protective structure outside the cytoplasmic membrane composed of peptidoglycan (also known as murein), a molecule made up of a glycan (sugar) backbone of repetitively alternating N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid with short, attached, cross-linked peptide chains containing unusual amino acids. An example of this component is found in Escherichia coli.
0009277	name:Name:fungal-type cell wall	name:Synonym:beta-glucan-containing cell wall	name:Synonym:chitin- and beta-glucan-containing cell wall	name:Synonym:chitin-containing cell wall	info:Definition:A rigid yet dynamic structure surrounding the plasma membrane that affords protection from stresses and contributes to cell morphogenesis, consisting of extensively cross-linked glycoproteins and carbohydrates. The glycoproteins may be modified with N- or O-linked carbohydrates, or glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors; the polysaccharides are primarily branched glucans, including beta-linked and alpha-linked glucans, and may also include chitin and other carbohydrate polymers, but not cellulose or pectin. Enzymes involved in cell wall biosynthesis are also found in the cell wall. Note that some forms of fungi develop a capsule outside of the cell wall under certain circumstances; this is considered a separate structure.
0009505	name:Name:plant-type cell wall	name:Synonym:cellulose and pectin-containing cell wall	info:Definition:A more or less rigid stucture lying outside the cell membrane of a cell and composed of cellulose and pectin and other organic and inorganic substances.
0031160	name:Name:spore wall	name:Synonym:spore coat	info:Definition:The specialized envelope lying outside the cell membrane of a spore.
0030112	name:Name:glycocalyx	info:Definition:A viscous, carbohydrate rich layer at the outermost periphery of a cell.
0030114	name:Name:slime layer	info:Definition:A slime layer is an easily removed, diffuse, unorganized layer of extracellular material that surrounds a cell. Specifically this consists mostly of exopolysaccharides, glycoproteins, and glycolipids.
0042603	name:Name:capsule	info:Definition:A protective structure surrounding some fungi and bacteria, attached externally to the cell wall and composed primarily of polysaccharides. Capsules are highly organized structures that adhere strongly to cells and can not be easily removed. Capsules play important roles in pathogenicity, preventing phagocytosis by other cells, adherance, and resistance to dessication.
0030115	name:Name:S-layer	info:Definition:A crystalline protein layer surrounding some bacteria.
0035805	name:Name:egg coat	name:Synonym:vitelline membrane	name:Synonym:zona pellucida	info:Definition:A specialized extracellular matrix that surrounds the ovum of animals. The egg coat provides structural support and can play an essential role in oogenesis, fertilization and early development.
0060387	name:Name:fertilization envelope	name:Synonym:fertilization membrane	info:Definition:A structure that lies outside the plasma membrane and surrounds the egg. The fertilization envelope forms from the vitelline membrane after fertilization as a result of cortical granule release.
0060388	name:Name:vitelline envelope	name:Synonym:fertilization membrane	info:Definition:A glycoprotein-based structure that lies outside the plasma membrane and surrounds the egg before fertilization.
0042600	name:Name:chorion	info:Definition:A protective, noncellular membrane that surrounds the eggs of various animals including insects and fish.
0030427	name:Name:site of polarized growth	info:Definition:Any part of a cell where non-isotropic growth takes place.
0001411	name:Name:hyphal tip	info:Definition:The end, or tip, of a fungal hypha, where polarized growth occurs during hyphal elongation.
0005934	name:Name:cellular bud tip	info:Definition:The end of a cellular bud distal to the site of attachment to the mother cell.
0005935	name:Name:cellular bud neck	info:Definition:The constriction between the mother cell and daughter cell (bud) in an organism that reproduces by budding.
0030426	name:Name:growth cone	info:Definition:The migrating motile tip of a growing nerve cell axon or dendrite.
0044294	name:Name:dendritic growth cone	name:Synonym:dendrite growth cone	info:Definition:The migrating motile tip of a growing nerve cell dendrite.
0044295	name:Name:axonal growth cone	name:Synonym:axon growth cone	info:Definition:The migrating motile tip of a growing nerve cell axon.
0035838	name:Name:growing cell tip	name:Synonym:growing cell end	info:Definition:The region at either end of the longest axis of a cylindrical or elongated cell, where polarized growth occurs.
0035840	name:Name:old growing cell tip	name:Synonym:old growing cell end	info:Definition:A cell tip which has existed for at least one complete cell cycle, and at which polarized growth occurs. For example, in fission yeast the cell end that existed prior to cell division grows immediately after division, and contains a distinctive complement of proteins including actin cytoskeletal structures.
0035841	name:Name:new growing cell tip	name:Synonym:new cell tip after activation of bipolar cell growth	name:Synonym:post-NETO new cell end	name:Synonym:post-NETO new cell tip	name:Synonym:post-new end take-off new cell tip	info:Definition:A cell tip that was newly formed at the last cell division, and that has started to grow after the cell has activated bipolar cell growth (i.e. in which new end take-off, NETO, has taken place). New end take-off is when monopolar cells initiate bipolar growth.
0090404	name:Name:pollen tube tip	info:Definition:The region at growing end of the pollen tube cell, where polarized growth occurs.
0043332	name:Name:mating projection tip	name:Synonym:conjugation tube tip	name:Synonym:shmoo tip	info:Definition:The apex of the mating projection in unicellular fungi exposed to mating pheromone; site of polarized growth.
0030428	name:Name:cell septum	name:Synonym:cross wall	name:Synonym:septum	info:Definition:A structure composed of peptidoglycan and often chitin in addition to other materials. It usually forms perpendicular to the long axis of a cell or hypha and grows centripetally from the cell wall to the center of the cell and often functions in the compartmentalization of a cell into two daughter cells.
0000933	name:Name:adventitious septum	info:Definition:A cell septum whose formation is independent of nuclear division.
0000934	name:Name:porous cell septum	name:Synonym:porous septum	info:Definition:A septum or cross wall which does not entirely span the space between two portions of cell wall and may contain a specialized central pore structure. A porous septum allows the movement of organelles and/or cytoplasm between compartments.
0000937	name:Name:dolipore septum	info:Definition:A septum, or cross-wall, between two portions of a cell or hypha; contains a central pore around which the septum is swollen to form a barrel-shaped structure; pore is covered on each side of the septum by a septal pore cap (parenthosome).
0000935	name:Name:barrier septum	name:Synonym:complete septum	info:Definition:A septum which spans a cell and does not allow exchange of organelles or cytoplasm between compartments.
0000936	name:Name:primary cell septum	name:Synonym:primary septum	info:Definition:A cell septum that forms following nuclear division.
0051077	name:Name:secondary cell septum	name:Synonym:secondary septum	info:Definition:Cell wall structures composed of linear polysaccharides which are deposited at both sides of the primary septum at 90 degrees to the primary septum.
0030496	name:Name:midbody	info:Definition:A thin cytoplasmic bridge formed between daughter cells at the end of cytokinesis. The midbody forms where the contractile ring constricts, and may persist for some time before finally breaking to complete cytokinesis.
0031252	name:Name:cell leading edge	name:Synonym:front of cell	name:Synonym:leading edge of cell	info:Definition:The area of a motile cell closest to the direction of movement.
0031254	name:Name:trailing edge	name:Synonym:back of cell	info:Definition:The area of a motile cell opposite to the direction of movement.
0031255	name:Name:lateral part of motile cell	info:Definition:The area of a motile cell perpendicular to the direction of movement.
0031975	name:Name:envelope	info:Definition:A multilayered structure surrounding all or part of a cell; encompasses one or more lipid bilayers, and may include a cell wall layer; also includes the space between layers.
0030313	name:Name:cell envelope	info:Definition:An envelope that surrounds a bacterial cell and includes the cytoplasmic membrane and everything external, encompassing the periplasmic space, cell wall, and outer membrane if present.
0032153	name:Name:cell division site	name:Synonym:cell division plane	info:Definition:The eventual plane of cell division (also known as cell cleavage or cytokinesis) in a dividing cell. The cleavage apparatus, composed of septin structures and the actomyosin contractile ring, forms along this plane. The mitotic, or meiotic, spindle is aligned perpendicular to the division plane.
0032155	name:Name:cell division site part	name:Synonym:cell division plane part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the cell division plane, the eventual plane of cell division in a dividing cell.
0000399	name:Name:cellular bud neck septin structure	info:Definition:Any of a series of septin structures that are localized in the bud neck of a budding fungal cell during the cell cycle.
0000144	name:Name:cellular bud neck septin ring	info:Definition:A ring-shaped structure that forms at the site of cytokinesis; composed of members of the conserved family of filament forming proteins called septins as well as septin-associated proteins. In S. cerevisiae, this structure forms at the time of bud emergence and the septins show a high rate of exchange.
0032174	name:Name:cellular bud neck septin collar	info:Definition:A tubular structure with flared ends, shaped like an hourglass and composed of highly ordered arrays of septin filaments, that forms at the bud neck of a dividing cell. In S. cerevisiae, this structure is located at the bud neck throughout most of the cell cycle and the septins are fixed within the structure, not exchanging with soluble septins. This septin structure acts as a scaffold for other proteins that function at the bud neck.
0032177	name:Name:cellular bud neck split septin rings	info:Definition:Two separate septin rings that are formed from the septin collar at the time of cytokinesis in cells that divide by budding. These two rings are thought to delineate a special compartment in which factors involved in cytokinesis are concentrated.
0000923	name:Name:equatorial microtubule organizing center	name:Synonym:EMTOC	name:Synonym:equatorial microtubule organising centre	info:Definition:A microtubule organizing center formed by a band of gamma-tubulin that is recruited to a circumferential band of F-actin at the midpoint of a cell and which nucleates microtubules from the cell division site at the end of mitosis.
0031097	name:Name:medial cortex	name:Synonym:medial ring	info:Definition:A medial cortical band overlaying the nucleus which acts as a landmark for contractile ring positioning and plays a role in cell cycle regulation.
0032154	name:Name:cleavage furrow	info:Definition:In animal cells, the first sign of cleavage, or cytokinesis, is the appearance of a shallow groove in the cell surface near the old metaphase plate. A contractile ring containing actin and myosin is located just inside the plasma membrane at the location of the furrow. Ring contraction is associated with centripetal growth of the membrane that deepens the cleavage furrow and divides the cytoplasm of the two daughter cells. While the term 'cleavage furrow' was initially associated with animal cells, such a structure occurs in many other types of cells, including unicellular protists.
0032178	name:Name:medial membrane band	name:Synonym:sterol-rich membrane band	info:Definition:A sterol-rich region of the plasma membrane which forms at the cell surface overlying the contractile ring and spreads into the invaginating plasma membrane surrounding the septum.
0055031	name:Name:gamma-tubulin large complex, equatorial microtubule organizing center	name:Synonym:gamma-tubulin large complex, eMTOC	name:Synonym:gamma-tubulin large complex, equatorial microtubule organizing centre	info:Definition:A complex of gamma tubulin and associated proteins thought to be formed by multimerization of gamma-tubulin small complexes located at equatorial microtubule organizing centers.
0032179	name:Name:germ tube	info:Definition:The slender tubular outgrowth first produced by most spores in germination.
0033774	name:Name:basal labyrinth	info:Definition:A region in the lower half of some cells formed from extensive infoldings of the basal plasma membrane; includes cytoplasm adjacent to the infolded membrane.
0035748	name:Name:myelin sheath abaxonal region	info:Definition:The region of the myelin sheath furthest from the axon.
0035749	name:Name:myelin sheath adaxonal region	info:Definition:The region of the myelin sheath nearest to the axon.
0042597	name:Name:periplasmic space	name:Synonym:periplasm	info:Definition:The region between the inner (cytoplasmic) and outer membrane (Gram-negative Bacteria) or inner membrane and cell wall (Fungi).
0030287	name:Name:cell wall-bounded periplasmic space	name:Synonym:cell wall bounded periplasmic space	name:Synonym:cell wall-enclosed periplasmic space	info:Definition:The region between the plasma membrane and the cell wall, as found in organisms such as yeast and Gram positive bacteria. The region is thinner than the equivalent in Gram negative bacteria.
0030288	name:Name:outer membrane-bounded periplasmic space	name:Synonym:outer membrane bounded periplasmic space	name:Synonym:outer membrane-enclosed periplasmic space	info:Definition:The region between the inner (cytoplasmic or plasma) membrane and outer membrane of organisms with two membranes such as Gram negative bacteria. These periplasmic spaces are relatively thick and contain a thin cell wall.
0042763	name:Name:intracellular immature spore	name:Synonym:forespore	info:Definition:A cell or part of the cell that constitutes an early developmental stage of a spore, a small reproductive body that is highly resistant to desiccation and heat and is capable of growing into a new organism, produced especially by certain bacteria, fungi, algae, and nonflowering plants.
0042601	name:Name:endospore-forming forespore	info:Definition:Portion of the cell formed during the process of bacterial sporulation that will ultimately become the core of the endospore. An endospore is a type of dormant cell that is resistant to adverse conditions.
0042764	name:Name:ascospore-type prospore	info:Definition:An immature spore undergoing development. The spore usually consists of nucleic acid, prospore membrane(s) that encase the nucleic acid, and ultimately a cell wall that covers the membrane(s). This type of spore is observed in ascopore-forming fungi.
0042995	name:Name:cell projection	name:Synonym:cell process	name:Synonym:cellular process	name:Synonym:cellular projection	info:Definition:A prolongation or process extending from a cell, e.g. a flagellum or axon.
0001726	name:Name:ruffle	name:Synonym:membrane ruffle	info:Definition:Projection at the leading edge of a crawling cell; the protrusions are supported by a microfilament meshwork.
0001931	name:Name:uropod	name:Synonym:distal pole complex	name:Synonym:retractile pole	name:Synonym:uropodium	info:Definition:A membrane projection with related cytoskeletal components at the trailing edge of a cell in the process of migrating or being activated, found on the opposite side of the cell from the leading edge or immunological synapse, respectively.
0005902	name:Name:microvillus	info:Definition:Thin cylindrical membrane-covered projections on the surface of an animal cell containing a core bundle of actin filaments. Present in especially large numbers on the absorptive surface of intestinal cells.
0005903	name:Name:brush border	info:Definition:Dense covering of microvilli on the apical surface of epithelial cells in tissues such as the intestine, kidney, and choroid plexus; the microvilli aid absorption by increasing the surface area of the cell.
0005929	name:Name:cilium	info:Definition:A specialized eukaryotic organelle that consists of a filiform extrusion of the cell surface. Each cilium is bounded by an extrusion of the cytoplasmic membrane, and contains a regular longitudinal array of microtubules, anchored basally in a centriole.
0031514	name:Name:motile cilium	name:Synonym:motile cilia	name:Synonym:motile secondary cilium	info:Definition:A cilium which has a variable arrangement of axonemal microtubules, contains molecular motors, and beats with a characteristic whip-like pattern that promotes cell motility or transport of fluids and other cells across a cell surface. Motile cilia are typically found in multiple copies on epithelial cells that line the lumenal ducts of various tissues. Motile cilia may also function as sensory organelles.
0072372	name:Name:primary cilium	info:Definition:A cilium found on many different cell types that is typically present in a single copy per cell. A primary cilium may have a variable array of axonemal microtubules and may or may not contain molecular motors.
0005937	name:Name:mating projection	name:Synonym:conjugation tube	name:Synonym:shmoo	info:Definition:The projection formed by unicellular fungi in response to mating pheromone.
0009289	name:Name:pilus	name:Synonym:fimbria	name:Synonym:fimbriae	name:Synonym:fimbrium	name:Synonym:pili	info:Definition:A proteinaceous hair-like appendage on the surface of bacteria ranging from 2-8 nm in diameter.
0044096	name:Name:type IV pilus	name:Synonym:TFP	name:Synonym:type 4 pilus	name:Synonym:type IV fimbriae	info:Definition:A short filamentous structure on the surface of a bacterial cell distinguished from other pili by post-translational N-methylation of the pilin monomers.
0016028	name:Name:rhabdomere	info:Definition:The specialized microvillar organelle on the apical surfaces of a photoreceptor cell containing the visual pigment rhodopsin and most of the proteins involved in phototransduction.
0030027	name:Name:lamellipodium	info:Definition:A thin sheetlike process extended by the leading edge of a crawling fibroblast; contains a dense meshwork of actin filaments.
0030175	name:Name:filopodium	name:Synonym:microspike	info:Definition:Thin, stiff protrusion extended by the leading edge of a motile cell such as a crawling fibroblast or amoeba, or an axonal growth cone; usually approximately 0.1 um wide, 5-10 um long, can be up to 50 um long in axon growth cones; contains a loose bundle of about 20 actin filaments oriented with their plus ends pointing outward.
0031143	name:Name:pseudopodium	name:Synonym:pseudopod	info:Definition:A temporary protrusion or retractile process of a cell, associated with flowing movements of the protoplasm, and serving for locomotion and feeding.
0031912	name:Name:oral apparatus	info:Definition:Complex basket- or funnel-like structure used by the cell to collect food and channel it to the cytostome; includes specialized sub-structures made up of closely-spaced cilia and underlying basal bodies and fibrillar systems.
0032059	name:Name:bleb	info:Definition:A cell extension characterized by rapid formation, rounded shape, and scarcity of organelles within the protrusions.
0035230	name:Name:cytoneme	name:Synonym:membrane nanotube	info:Definition:A long, thin, polarized cell projection that contains actin and can extend for distances many times the diameter of the cell. Cytonemes represent extensions of cell cytoplasm and typically have a diameter of approximately 0.2um.
0035618	name:Name:root hair	info:Definition:A long, thin projection from a root epidermal cell that contains F-actin and tubulin, and a cell wall.
0043005	name:Name:neuron projection	name:Synonym:neurite	name:Synonym:neuron process	name:Synonym:neuron protrusion	name:Synonym:neuronal cell projection	info:Definition:A prolongation or process extending from a nerve cell, e.g. an axon or dendrite.
0030424	name:Name:axon	info:Definition:The long process of a neuron that conducts nerve impulses, usually away from the cell body to the terminals and varicosities, which are sites of storage and release of neurotransmitter.
0030425	name:Name:dendrite	info:Definition:A neuron projection that has a short, tapering, often branched, morphology, receives and integrates signals from other neurons or from sensory stimuli, and conducts a nerve impulse towards the axon or the cell body. In most neurons, the impulse is conveyed from dendrites to axon via the cell body, but in some types of unipolar neuron, the impulse does not travel via the cell body.
0044309	name:Name:neuron spine	info:Definition:A small membranous protrusion, often ending in a bulbous head and attached to the neuron by a narrow stalk or neck.
0044317	name:Name:rod spherule	name:Synonym:rod cell spherule	name:Synonym:rod photoreceptor spherule	info:Definition:A specialized neuron projection which is the site of synaptic transmission produced by retinal rod cells. Rod spherules are small round enlargements of the axon (3-5 micrometers diameter) or even extensions of the cell body.
0070852	name:Name:cell body fiber	name:Synonym:cell body fibre	name:Synonym:primary neurite	info:Definition:A neuron projection that is found in unipolar neurons and corresponds to the region between the cell body and the point at which the single projection branches.
0070451	name:Name:cell hair	name:Synonym:imaginal disc-derived wing hair	name:Synonym:non-sensory hair	info:Definition:A long, thin cell projection that contains F-actin and tubulin, with microtubules centrally located and F-actin peripherally located.
0070685	name:Name:macropinocytic cup	name:Synonym:crown	info:Definition:A cell projection that forms at the site of macropinocytosis, a form of endocytosis that results in the uptake of relatively large amounts of extracellular fluid. The macropinocytic cup membrane selectively excludes certain proteins, such as H36 or PM4C4 in Dictyostelium, and the underlying cytoskeleton is enriched in F-actin and coronin.
0071437	name:Name:invadopodium	info:Definition:A cell projection that emerges from the ECM-facing surface of a cell, is enriched in actin and associated cytoskeletal proteins, and displays localized proteolytic activity toward the substrate.
0085035	name:Name:haustorium	info:Definition:A projection from a cell or tissue that penetrates the host's cell wall and invaginates the host cell membrane.
0085041	name:Name:arbuscule	info:Definition:Highly branched symbiont haustoria within host root cortex cells, responsible for nutrient exchange.
0090395	name:Name:plant cell papilla	info:Definition:A cell projection that is a short, rounded projection from a plant epidermal cell.
0090396	name:Name:leaf papilla	info:Definition:A plant cell papilla that is part of a leaf papilla cell.
0090397	name:Name:stigma papilla	info:Definition:A plant cell papilla that is part of a stigma papilla cell.
0090406	name:Name:pollen tube	info:Definition:A tubular cell projection that is part of a pollen tube cell and extends from a pollen grain.
0043204	name:Name:perikaryon	name:Synonym:cell soma cytoplasm	info:Definition:The portion of the cell soma (cell body) that excludes the nucleus.
0043209	name:Name:myelin sheath	name:Synonym:Schwann Cell Myelin Sheath	info:Definition:An electrically insulating fatty layer that surrounds the axons of many neurons. It is an outgrowth of glial cells: Schwann cells supply the myelin for peripheral neurons while oligodendrocytes supply it to those of the central nervous system.
0043218	name:Name:compact myelin	name:Synonym:Schwann Cell Compact Myelin	info:Definition:The portion of the myelin sheath in which layers of cell membrane are tightly juxtaposed, completely excluding cytoplasm. The juxtaposed cytoplasmic surfaces form the major dense line, while the juxtaposed extracellular surfaces form the interperiod line visible in electron micrographs.
0043219	name:Name:lateral loop	info:Definition:Non-compact myelin located adjacent to the nodes of Ranvier in a myelin segment. These non-compact regions include cytoplasm from the cell responsible for synthesizing the myelin. Lateral loops are found in the paranodal region adjacent to the nodes of Ranvier, while Schmidt-Lantermann clefts are analogous structures found within the compact myelin internode.
0043220	name:Name:Schmidt-Lanterman incisure	name:Synonym:Schmidt-Lanterman cleft	info:Definition:Regions within compact myelin in which the cytoplasmic faces of the enveloping myelin sheath are not tightly juxtaposed, and include cytoplasm from the cell responsible for making the myelin. Schmidt-Lanterman incisures occur in the compact myelin internode, while lateral loops are analogous structures found in the paranodal region adjacent to the nodes of Ranvier.
0044099	name:Name:polar tube	info:Definition:A highly specialized structure unique to microsporidia that is required for host cell invasion. In the spore, the polar tube is connected at the anterior end, and then coils around the sporoplasm. Upon appropriate environmental stimulation, the polar tube rapidly discharges out of the spore, pierces a cell membrane and serves as a conduit for sporoplasm passage into the new host cell.
0044297	name:Name:cell body	name:Synonym:cell soma	info:Definition:The portion of a cell bearing surface projections such as axons, dendrites, cilia, or flagella that includes the nucleus, but excludes all cell projections.
0043025	name:Name:neuronal cell body	name:Synonym:neuron cell body	name:Synonym:neuronal cell soma	info:Definition:The portion of a neuron that includes the nucleus, but excludes all cell projections such as axons and dendrites.
0044424	name:Name:intracellular part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the living contents of a cell; the matter contained within (but not including) the plasma membrane, usually taken to exclude large vacuoles and masses of secretory or ingested material. In eukaryotes it includes the nucleus and cytoplasm.
0000131	name:Name:incipient cellular bud site	info:Definition:The portion of the budding yeast plasma membrane where a daughter cell will emerge. The yeast marks this spot with bud-site selection proteins before bud emergence occurs. Actin is polarized to this spot just prior to and during bud emergence.
0005727	name:Name:extrachromosomal circular DNA	info:Definition:Circular DNA structures that are not part of a chromosome.
0005728	name:Name:extrachromosomal rDNA circle	name:Synonym:extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA circle	info:Definition:Circular DNA molecules encoding ribosomal RNA that are replicated independently of chromosomal replication. These molecules originate in the chromosome but are excised and circularized, often by intramolecular homologous recombination between direct tandem repeats.
0005729	name:Name:2-micrometer circle DNA	info:Definition:A plasmid commonly found in Saccharomyces, inherited in a non-Mendelian manner and often present in 100-400 copies.
0005737	name:Name:cytoplasm	info:Definition:All of the contents of a cell excluding the plasma membrane and nucleus, but including other subcellular structures.
0016528	name:Name:sarcoplasm	info:Definition:The cytoplasm of a muscle cell; includes the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
0045495	name:Name:pole plasm	name:Synonym:germ plasm	name:Synonym:polar plasm	info:Definition:Differentiated cytoplasm associated with a pole (animal, vegetal, anterior, or posterior) of an oocyte, egg or early embryo.
0009579	name:Name:thylakoid	name:Synonym:photosynthetic membrane	info:Definition:A membranous cellular structure that bears the photosynthetic pigments in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. In cyanobacteria thylakoids are of various shapes and are attached to, or continuous with, the plasma membrane. In eukaryotes they are flattened, membrane-bounded disk-like structures located in the chloroplasts; in the chloroplasts of higher plants the thylakoids form dense stacks called grana. Isolated thylakoid preparations can carry out photosynthetic electron transport and the associated phosphorylation.
0016234	name:Name:inclusion body	info:Definition:A discrete intracellular part formed of aggregated molecules such as proteins or other biopolymers.
0016235	name:Name:aggresome	info:Definition:An inclusion body formed by dynein-dependent retrograde transport of an aggregated protein on microtubules.
0031234	name:Name:extrinsic to internal side of plasma membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to the surface of the plasma membrane that faces the cytoplasm, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0044100	name:Name:sporoplasm	info:Definition:The complex infective apparatus corresponding to the central mass of cytoplasm within a spore that is injected into a host cell by various parasitic microorganisms.
0044436	name:Name:thylakoid part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a thylakoid, a sac-like vesicle that bears the photosynthetic pigments in photosynthetic organisms.
0031360	name:Name:intrinsic to thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:Located in a thylakoid membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031361	name:Name:integral to thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:Penetrating at least one phospholipid bilayer of a thylakoid membrane. May also refer to the state of being buried in the bilayer with no exposure outside the bilayer.
0031977	name:Name:thylakoid lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by a thylakoid membrane.
0033174	name:Name:chloroplast proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, catalytic core CF(1)	name:Synonym:chloroplast proton-transporting F-type ATPase complex, catalytic core CF(1)	info:Definition:The catalytic sector of the mitochondrial hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase; it comprises the catalytic core and central stalk, and is peripherally associated with the chloroplast thylakoid membrane when the entire ATP synthase is assembled. The chloroplast F0 domain contains three alpha, three beta, one gamma, one delta, and one epsilon subunits.
0033175	name:Name:chloroplast proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor CF(o)	name:Synonym:chloroplast proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor CF(0)	name:Synonym:chloroplast proton-transporting F-type ATPase complex, coupling factor CF(o)	info:Definition:All non-F1 subunits of the chloroplast hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, including integral and peripheral chloroplast thylakoid membrane proteins.
0035448	name:Name:extrinsic to thylakoid membrane	name:Synonym:peripheral to thylakoid membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of a thylakoid membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0045320	name:Name:chloroplast proton-transporting ATP synthase complex	name:Synonym:chloroplast hydrogen-translocating F-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:chloroplast proton-transporting F-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-translocating F-type ATPase complex	info:Definition:A proton-transporting ATP synthase complex found in the chloroplast thylakoid membrane; it catalyzes the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP during photo-phosphorylation.
0044444	name:Name:cytoplasmic part	name:Synonym:cytoplasm component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the cytoplasm, all of the contents of a cell excluding the plasma membrane and nucleus, but including other subcellular structures.
0000229	name:Name:cytoplasmic chromosome	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic interphase chromosome	info:Definition:A chromosome found in the cytoplasm.
0000407	name:Name:pre-autophagosomal structure	name:Synonym:isolation membrane	name:Synonym:PAS	name:Synonym:perivacuolar space	name:Synonym:phagophore	name:Synonym:phagophore assembly site	info:Definition:A punctate structure localized in the vicinity of the vacuole that is required for the formation of autophagosomes.
0000789	name:Name:cytoplasmic chromatin	info:Definition:The ordered and organized complex of DNA and protein that forms the chromosome in the cytoplasm.
0005811	name:Name:lipid particle	name:Synonym:adiposome	name:Synonym:lipid body	name:Synonym:lipid droplet	info:Definition:Any particle of coalesced lipids in the cytoplasm of a cell. May include associated proteins.
0005829	name:Name:cytosol	info:Definition:The part of the cytoplasm that does not contain organelles but which does contain other particulate matter, such as protein complexes.
0005868	name:Name:cytoplasmic dynein complex	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic dynein intermediate chain	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic dynein intermediate light chain	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic dynein light chain	info:Definition:Any dynein complex that catalyzes movement along a cytoplasmic microtubule; cytoplasmic dynein complexes participates in many transport activities in eukaryotes, such as mRNA localization, intermediate filament transport, nuclear envelope breakdown, apoptosis, transport of centrosomal proteins, mitotic spindle assembly, virus transport, kinetochore functions, and movement of signaling and spindle checkpoint proteins. Subunits associated with the dynein heavy chain mediate association between dynein heavy chain and cargoes,and may include light chains and light intermediate chains.
0005938	name:Name:cell cortex	name:Synonym:cell periphery	name:Synonym:peripheral cytoplasm	info:Definition:The region of a cell that lies just beneath the plasma membrane and often, but not always, contains a network of actin filaments and associated proteins.
0009504	name:Name:cell plate	info:Definition:The nascent cell membrane and cell wall structure that forms between two daughter nuclei near the center of a dividing plant cell. It develops at the equitorial region of the phragmoplast. It grows outwards to join with the lateral walls and form two daughter cells.
0009524	name:Name:phragmoplast	info:Definition:Fibrous structure (light microscope view) that arises between the daughter nuclei at telophase and within which the initial partition (cell plate), dividing the mother cell in two (cytokinesis), is formed. Appears at first as a spindle connected to the two nuclei, but later spreads laterally in the form of a ring. Consists of microtubules.
0009525	name:Name:phragmosome	info:Definition:A flattened membranous vesicle containing cell wall components.
0019037	name:Name:viral assembly intermediate	info:Definition:Specific locations and structures in the virus infected cell involved in assembling new virions.
0032838	name:Name:cell projection cytoplasm	info:Definition:All of the contents of a cell projection, excluding the plasma membrane surrounding the projection.
0033011	name:Name:perinuclear theca	info:Definition:A condensed cytoplasmic structure that covers the nucleus of mammalian spermatozoa except for a narrow zone around the insertion of the tail. It shows two distinct regions, a subacrosomal layer and, continuing caudally beyond the acrosomic system, the postacrosomal sheath. The perinuclear theca has been considered a cytoskeletal scaffold responsible for maintaining the overall architecture of the mature sperm head; however, recent studies indicate that the bulk of its constituent proteins are not traditional cytoskeletal proteins but rather a variety of cytosolic proteins.
0042587	name:Name:glycogen granule	name:Synonym:glycogen particle	info:Definition:Cytoplasmic bead-like structures of animal cells, visible by electron microscope. Each granule is a functional unit with the biosynthesis and catabolism of glycogen being catalyzed by enzymes bound to the granule surface.
0042716	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived chromatophore	name:Synonym:chromatophore vesicle	info:Definition:A pigment-bearing structure that is derived from the cytoplasmic membrane, sometimes consisting of simple invaginations and sometimes a complete vesicle. This component is found in certain photosynthetic bacteria and cyanobacteria.
0042718	name:Name:yolk granule	info:Definition:Discrete structures that partition the water-insoluble portion of the yolk of oocytes and ova, which may or may not be membrane enclosed.
0043265	name:Name:ectoplasm	info:Definition:Granule free cytoplasm, lying immediately below the plasma membrane.
0043597	name:Name:cytoplasmic replication fork	info:Definition:The Y-shaped region of a cytoplasmic replicating DNA molecule, resulting from the separation of the DNA strands and in which the synthesis of new strands takes place. Also includes associated protein complexes.
0044445	name:Name:cytosolic part	name:Synonym:cytosol component	info:Definition:Any constituent part of cytosol, that part of the cytoplasm that does not contain membranous or particulate subcellular components.
0044448	name:Name:cell cortex part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the cell cortex, the region of a cell that lies just beneath the plasma membrane and often, but not always, contains a network of actin filaments and associated proteins.
0045169	name:Name:fusome	info:Definition:A large intracellular spectrin-rich structure that has been found in insect germline cells and mammalian hematopoietic cells. The fusome is an elongated, branched structure, formed from the spherical spectrosome organelle.
0048471	name:Name:perinuclear region of cytoplasm	info:Definition:Cytoplasm situated near, or occurring around, the nucleus.
0060417	name:Name:yolk	info:Definition:The cytoplasmic part that serves as a nutrient reserve or energy source for the developing embryo.
0060418	name:Name:yolk plasma	info:Definition:Discrete structures that partition the water-soluble portion of the yolk of oocytes and ova, which may or may not be membrane enclosed.
0046821	name:Name:extrachromosomal DNA	info:Definition:DNA structures that are not part of a chromosome.
0070090	name:Name:metaphase plate	info:Definition:The intracellular plane, located halfway between the poles of the spindle, where chromosomes align during metaphase of mitotic or meiotic nuclear division.
0070477	name:Name:endospore core	info:Definition:An intracellular part that represents the innermost portion of an endospore; the endospore core is dehydrated, enriched in dipicolinic acid and divalent cations, and metabolically inactive.
0070725	name:Name:Yb body	info:Definition:A cytoplasmic part that appears as an electron-dense sphere of around 1.5 micron diameter containing Yb protein found in somatic cells of ovary and testis. There are one to two Yb bodies per cell.
0044425	name:Name:membrane part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a membrane, a double layer of lipid molecules that encloses all cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins.
0005642	name:Name:annulate lamellae	info:Definition:Stacks of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes containing a high density of nuclear pores, thought to form from excess nuclear membrane components, that have been described in a number of different cells. Annulate lamellar membranes are continuous with and embedded within the ER.
0005905	name:Name:coated pit	info:Definition:A part of the endomembrane system in the form of an invagination of a membrane upon which a clathrin coat forms, and that can be converted by vesicle budding into a clathrin-coated vesicle. Coated pits form on the plasma membrane, where they are involved in receptor-mediated selective transport of many proteins and other macromolecules across the cell membrane, in the trans-Golgi network, and on some endosomes.
0019898	name:Name:extrinsic to membrane	name:Synonym:peripheral membrane protein	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of a membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0019897	name:Name:extrinsic to plasma membrane	name:Synonym:juxtamembrane	name:Synonym:peripheral plasma membrane protein	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the plasma membrane, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031244	name:Name:extrinsic to cell outer membrane	info:Definition:Loosely bound to one surface of the outer membrane of the cell, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031224	name:Name:intrinsic to membrane	info:Definition:Located in a membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0016021	name:Name:integral to membrane	name:Synonym:transmembrane	info:Definition:Penetrating at least one phospholipid bilayer of a membrane. May also refer to the state of being buried in the bilayer with no exposure outside the bilayer. When used to describe a protein, indicates that all or part of the peptide sequence is embedded in the membrane.
0031225	name:Name:anchored to membrane	info:Definition:Tethered to a membrane by a covalently attached anchor, such as a lipid group, that is embedded in the membrane. When used to describe a protein, indicates that none of the peptide sequence is embedded in the membrane.
0031226	name:Name:intrinsic to plasma membrane	info:Definition:Located in the plasma membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031230	name:Name:intrinsic to cell outer membrane	info:Definition:Located in the cell outer membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane.
0031240	name:Name:external side of cell outer membrane	name:Synonym:external side of outer membrane	info:Definition:The side of the outer membrane that is opposite to the side that faces the periplasm of the cell.
0031241	name:Name:internal side of cell outer membrane	name:Synonym:internal side of outer membrane	info:Definition:The side of the outer membrane that faces the periplasm of the cell.
0044214	name:Name:fully spanning the plasma membrane	name:Synonym:transmembrane	info:Definition:Fully spanning both phospholipid bilayers of a plasma membrane.
0044459	name:Name:plasma membrane part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the plasma membrane, the membrane surrounding a cell that separates the cell from its external environment. It consists of a phospholipid bilayer and associated proteins.
0000222	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V0 domain	name:Synonym:plasma membrane hydrogen ion-transporting ATPase V0 domain	info:Definition:The V0 domain of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase found in the plasma membrane.
0000223	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting V-type ATPase, V1 domain	name:Synonym:plasma membrane hydrogen ion-transporting ATPase V1 domain	info:Definition:The V1 domain of a proton-transporting V-type ATPase found in the plasma membrane.
0001518	name:Name:voltage-gated sodium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage gated sodium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-dependent sodium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-sensitive sodium channel complex	info:Definition:A sodium channel in a cell membrane whose opening is governed by the membrane potential.
0001772	name:Name:immunological synapse	name:Synonym:c-SMAC	name:Synonym:supramolecular activation cluster	info:Definition:An area of close contact between a lymphocyte (T-, B-, or natural killer cell) and a target cell formed through the clustering of particular signaling and adhesion molecules and their associated membrane rafts on both the lymphocyte and the target cell and facilitating activation of the lymphocyte, transfer of membrane from the target cell to the lymphocyte, and in some situations killing of the target cell through release of secretory granules and/or death-pathway ligand-receptor interaction.
0001891	name:Name:phagocytic cup	info:Definition:An invagination of the cell membrane formed by an actin dependent process during phagocytosis. Following internalization it is converted into a phagosome.
0005891	name:Name:voltage-gated calcium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage gated calcium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-dependent calcium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-sensitive calcium channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a transmembrane channel through which calcium ions may pass in response to changes in membrane potential.
0005901	name:Name:caveola	name:Synonym:caveolae	name:Synonym:caveolar membrane	info:Definition:A membrane raft that forms small pit, depression, or invagination that communicates with the outside of a cell and extends inward, indenting the cytoplasm and the cell membrane. Examples include any of the minute pits or incuppings of the cell membrane formed during pinocytosis. Such caveolae may be pinched off to form free vesicles within the cytoplasm.
0008076	name:Name:voltage-gated potassium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage gated potassium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-dependent potassium channel complex	name:Synonym:voltage-sensitive potassium channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a transmembrane channel through which potassium ions may cross a cell membrane in response to changes in membrane potential.
0009546	name:Name:plasmodesmatal cytoplasmic sleeve	name:Synonym:plasmodesmatal cytoplasmic annulus	info:Definition:The space between the plasma membrane and the desmotubule of a plasmodesma.
0009548	name:Name:plasmodesmatal plasma membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a plasmodesma.
0009897	name:Name:external side of plasma membrane	name:Synonym:juxtamembrane	name:Synonym:outer surface of cytoplasmic membrane	info:Definition:The side of the plasma membrane that is opposite to the side that faces the cytoplasm.
0009898	name:Name:internal side of plasma membrane	name:Synonym:juxtamembrane	info:Definition:The side of the plasma membrane that faces the cytoplasm.
0009925	name:Name:basal plasma membrane	info:Definition:The region of the plasma membrane located at the basal end of the cell. Often used in reference to animal polarized epithelial membranes, where the basal membrane is the part attached to the extracellular matrix, or in plant cells, where the basal membrane is defined with respect to the zygotic axis.
0016323	name:Name:basolateral plasma membrane	info:Definition:The region of the plasma membrane that includes the basal end and sides of the cell. Often used in reference to animal polarized epithelial membranes, where the basal membrane is the part attached to the extracellular matrix, or in plant cells, where the basal membrane is defined with respect to the zygotic axis.
0016324	name:Name:apical plasma membrane	info:Definition:The region of the plasma membrane located at the apical end of the cell.
0016327	name:Name:apicolateral plasma membrane	info:Definition:The apical end of the lateral plasma membrane of epithelial cells.
0016328	name:Name:lateral plasma membrane	info:Definition:The membranes on the sides of epithelial cells which lie at the interface of adjacent cells.
0016935	name:Name:glycine-gated chloride channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a transmembrane channel through which chloride ions may pass in response to glycine binding to the channel complex or one of its constituent parts.
0019183	name:Name:histamine-gated chloride channel complex	info:Definition:A protein complex that forms a transmembrane channel through which chloride ions may pass in response to histamine binding to the channel complex or one of its constituent parts.
0030132	name:Name:clathrin coat of coated pit	info:Definition:The coat found on coated pits and the coated vesicles derived from coated pits; comprises clathrin and the AP-2 adaptor complex.
0030315	name:Name:T-tubule	name:Synonym:transverse tubule	name:Synonym:triad	info:Definition:Invagination of the plasma membrane of a muscle cell that extends inward from the cell surface around each myofibril. The ends of T-tubules make contact with the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane.
0031253	name:Name:cell projection membrane	name:Synonym:membrane extension	name:Synonym:membrane projection	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a cell surface projection.
0031256	name:Name:leading edge membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding the leading edge of a motile cell.
0031257	name:Name:trailing edge membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding the trailing edge of a motile cell.
0031520	name:Name:plasma membrane of cell tip	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding the cell tip.
0031910	name:Name:cytostome	info:Definition:Stable, specialized structure for the ingestion of food by the cell into phagosomes.
0031911	name:Name:cytoproct	info:Definition:Stable, specialized structure for extrusion of waste by the cell into the surrounding medium.
0031979	name:Name:plasma membrane-derived thylakoid lumen	name:Synonym:plasma membrane thylakoid lumen	info:Definition:The volume enclosed by a plasma membrane-derived thylakoid.
0032584	name:Name:growth cone membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a growth cone.
0033012	name:Name:porosome	info:Definition:A permanent cup-shaped structure at the cell plasma membrane in secretory cells. Following a secretory stimulus, secretory vesicles transiently dock and fuse at the base of porosomes and release intravesicular contents dictated by the turgor pressure generated from the swelling of secretory vesicles.
0033101	name:Name:cellular bud membrane	name:Synonym:cellular bud plasma membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a cellular bud.
0033181	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:plasma membrane hydrogen ion-transporting ATPase	info:Definition:A proton-transporting two-sector ATPase complex found in the plasma membrane.
0044280	name:Name:subplasmalemmal coating	info:Definition:Electron dense material observed coating the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane in certain regions of a neuron, e.g., the axon initial segment; the nodal membrane at the Node of Ranvier.
0044298	name:Name:cell body membrane	name:Synonym:cell soma membrane	info:Definition:The plasma membrane of a cell that bears surface projections such as axons, dendrites, cilia, or flagella, excluding the plasma membrane on cell projections.
0045260	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase complex	name:Synonym:hydrogen-translocating F-type ATPase complex 	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase	name:Synonym:plasma membrane hydrogen-translocating F-type ATPase complex	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex	info:Definition:A proton-transporting ATP synthase complex found in the plasma membrane. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045262	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, catalytic core F(1)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, F1 sector	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, catalytic core F(1)	info:Definition:The catalytic sector of the plasma membrane hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase; it comprises the catalytic core and central stalk, and is peripherally associated with the plasma membrane when the entire ATP synthase is assembled. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0045264	name:Name:plasma membrane proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(o)	name:Synonym:hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, F0 sector	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(0)	name:Synonym:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex, coupling factor F(o)	info:Definition:All non-F1 subunits of the plasma membrane hydrogen-transporting ATP synthase, including integral and peripheral plasma membrane proteins.
0045272	name:Name:plasma membrane respiratory chain complex I	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex	name:Synonym:respiratory chain complex I	info:Definition:A subcomplex of the respiratory chain located in the plasma membrane. It contains about 25 different polypeptide subunits, including NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), flavin mononucleotide and several different iron-sulfur clusters containing non-heme iron. The iron undergoes oxidation-reduction between Fe(II) and Fe(III), and catalyzes proton translocation linked to the oxidation of NADH by ubiquinone. Examples of this component are found in Bacterial species.
0046691	name:Name:intracellular canaliculus	info:Definition:An apical plasma membrane part that forms a narrow enfolded luminal membrane channel, lined with numerous microvilli, that appears to extend into the cytoplasm of the cell. A specialized network of intracellular canaliculi is a characteristic feature of parietal cells of the gastric mucosa in vertebrates.
0046868	name:Name:mesosome	info:Definition:An intracellular, often complex, membranous structure, sometimes with additional membranous lamellae inside, found in bacteria. They are associated with synthesis of DNA and secretion of proteins.
0070470	name:Name:plasma membrane respiratory chain	name:Synonym:plasma membrane electron transport chain	info:Definition:A respiratory chain located in the plasma membrane of a cell; made up of the protein complexes that form the mitochondrial electron transport system (the respiratory chain), associated with the plasma membrane. The respiratory chain complexes transfer electrons from an electron donor to an electron acceptor and are associated with a proton pump to create a transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
0070867	name:Name:mating projection tip membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding a mating projection tip.
0045121	name:Name:membrane raft	name:Synonym:GEM domain	name:Synonym:glycolipid-enriched membrane domain	name:Synonym:lipid raft	info:Definition:Any of the small (10-200 nm), heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched membrane domains that compartmentalize cellular processes. Small rafts can sometimes be stabilized to form larger platforms through protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions.
0070056	name:Name:prospore membrane leading edge	name:Synonym:forespore membrane leading edge	info:Definition:The region of the prospore membrane that extends to surround the spore nucleus; coated with specific proteins that are thought to play a role in prospore membrane organization.
0070057	name:Name:prospore membrane spindle pole body attachment site	name:Synonym:forespore membrane SPB attachment site	name:Synonym:forespore membrane spindle pole body attachment site	name:Synonym:prospore membrane SPB attachment site	info:Definition:The region of the prospore membrane to which the spindle pole body (SPB) is anchored; the prospore membrane extends from the SPB attachment site to surround the spore nucleus.
0070469	name:Name:respiratory chain	name:Synonym:membrane electron transport chain	info:Definition:The protein complexes that form the electron transport system (the respiratory chain), associated with a cell membrane, usually the plasma membrane (in prokaryotes) or the inner mitochondrial membrane (on eukaryotes). The respiratory chain complexes transfer electrons from an electron donor to an electron acceptor and are associated with a proton pump to create a transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
0005746	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain	name:Synonym:mitochondrial electron transport chain	info:Definition:The protein complexes that form the mitochondrial electron transport system (the respiratory chain), associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane. The respiratory chain complexes transfer electrons from an electron donor to an electron acceptor and are associated with a proton pump to create a transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
0044457	name:Name:cell septum part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a cell septum, a structure composed of peptidoglycan and often chitin in addition to other materials. It usually forms perpendicular to the long axis of a cell or hypha and grows centripetally from the cell wall to the center of the cell and often functions in the compartmentalization of a cell into two daughter cells.
0043187	name:Name:cell septum surface	name:Synonym:septum surface	info:Definition:The extracellular (rather than the intracellular) exterior of a dividing septum; this surface is usually composed of cell wall material, for example, lineal (1,3)-beta-D-glucan in S. pombe.
0044462	name:Name:external encapsulating structure part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of an external encapsulating structure, a structure that lies outside the plasma membrane and surrounds the entire cell.
0031236	name:Name:extrinsic to external side of plasma membrane, in periplasmic space	info:Definition:Located in the periplasmic space and loosely bound to the surface of the plasma membrane that faces away from the cytoplasm, but not integrated into the hydrophobic region.
0031237	name:Name:intrinsic to external side of plasma membrane, in periplasmic space	info:Definition:Located in the plasma membrane such that some covalently attached portion of the gene product, for example part of a peptide sequence or some other covalently attached group such as a GPI anchor, spans or is embedded in one or both leaflets of the membrane, with the bulk of the gene product located in the periplasmic space.
0044426	name:Name:cell wall part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of the cell wall, the rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal, and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0005621	name:Name:cellular bud scar	info:Definition:Crater-like ring of chitinous scar tissue located on the surface of the mother cell. It is formed after the newly emerged daughter cell separates thereby marking the site of cytokinesis and septation. The number of bud scars that accumulate on the surface of a cell is a useful determinant of replicative age.
0005630	name:Name:dityrosine layer of spore wall	info:Definition:The outermost layer of the spore wall, as described in Saccharomyces.
0005631	name:Name:chitosan layer of spore wall	info:Definition:The second outermost layer of the spore wall, as described in Saccharomyces.
0005632	name:Name:inner layer of spore wall	info:Definition:Either of the two innermost layers of the spore wall, as described in Saccharomyces.
0009549	name:Name:cellulose microfibril	info:Definition:A microfibril composed of cellulose arranged in orthogonal layers. Cellulose is a straight chain polysaccharide composed of B(14) linked glucose subunits. It is a major component of plant cell walls. Higher plant microfibrils are about 10nm in diameter and extremely long in relation to their width. The cellulose molecules are oriented parallel to the long axis of the microfibril in a paracrystalline array, which provides great tensile strength. The microfibrils are held in place by the wall matrix and their orientation is closely controlled by the cell.
0010339	name:Name:external side of cell wall	info:Definition:The side of the cell wall that is opposite to the side that faces the cell and its contents.
0043188	name:Name:cell septum edging	info:Definition:The cell wall material that surrounds the septum in fungal cells.
0043592	name:Name:exosporium	name:Synonym:epispore	name:Synonym:exospore	name:Synonym:perispore	info:Definition:The outermost layer of a bacterial endospore, which is loosely attached and located outside of the endospore coat. It is generally composed of protein, carbohydrate, and perhaps lipid.
0043593	name:Name:endospore coat	info:Definition:The layer in a bacterial endospore that lies under the exosporium, and is impermeable to many toxic molecules. The coat may also contain enzymes that are involved in endospore germination.
0043595	name:Name:endospore cortex	info:Definition:A layer surrounding a bacterial endospore found inside the outer endospore membrane, but outside the membrane surrounding the endospore core. It consists of peptidoglycan of a different chemical nature than that found in vegetative cell walls which results in less cross-linking of peptidoglycan.
0043680	name:Name:filiform apparatus	info:Definition:A complex of cell wall invaginations in a synergid cell, similar to those in transfer cells.
0071597	name:Name:cellular birth scar	info:Definition:Crater-like ring of chitinous scar tissue located on the surface of the daughter cell, in budding fungi, at the site of separation from the mother cell. It is formed after the newly emerged daughter cell separates, thereby marking the site of cytokinesis and septation.
0070825	name:Name:micropyle	info:Definition:An external encapsulating structure part of the chorion. A single cone-shaped specialization that forms an opening in the chorion that allows sperm entry into the egg prior to fertilization.
0044463	name:Name:cell projection part	info:Definition:Any constituent part of a cell projection, a prolongation or process extending from a cell, e.g. a flagellum or axon.
0001400	name:Name:mating projection base	name:Synonym:base of shmoo tip	name:Synonym:conjugation tube base	info:Definition:The region where the mating projection meets the bulk of the cell, in unicellular fungi exposed to mating pheromone.
0005932	name:Name:microtubule basal body	info:Definition:A short cylindrical array of microtubules and associated proteins found at the base of a eukaryotic cilium or flagellum that is similar in structure to a centriole. The basal body serves as a nucleation site for axoneme growth.
0032162	name:Name:mating projection septin band	info:Definition:A septin band, i.e. a diffuse ring composed of a series of septin bars running parallel to the long axis of the cell, located at the neck of a shmoo (mating projection).
0032175	name:Name:mating projection septin ring	info:Definition:A septin ring, i.e. a ring-shaped structure composed of septins and septin-associated proteins, located at the neck of a shmoo (mating projection). The septin ring in the neck of a shmoo may act as a barrier to localize mating factors in the shmoo tip.
0032433	name:Name:filopodium tip	info:Definition:The end of a filopodium distal to the body of the cell.
0033267	name:Name:axon part	info:Definition:A part of an axon, a cell projection of a neuron.
0030673	name:Name:axolemma	name:Synonym:axonal membrane	info:Definition:The portion of the plasma membrane surrounding an axon; it is a specialized trilaminar random mosaic of protein molecules floating within a fluid matrix of highly mobile phospholipid molecules, 7-8 nm in thickness.
0033268	name:Name:node of Ranvier	info:Definition:An axon part that is a gap in the myelin where voltage-gated sodium channels cluster and saltatory conduction is executed.
0033269	name:Name:internode region of axon	name:Synonym:internode	info:Definition:An axon part that is located between the nodes of Ranvier and surrounded by compact myelin sheath.
0033270	name:Name:paranode region of axon	name:Synonym:paranode	info:Definition:An axon part that is located adjacent to the nodes of Ranvier and surrounded by lateral loop portions of myelin sheath.
0043194	name:Name:initial segment	info:Definition:Portion of the axon proximal to the neuronal cell body, at the level of the axon hillock. The action potentials that propagate along the axon are generated at the level of this initial segment.
0043196	name:Name:varicosity	info:Definition:Non-terminal inflated portion of the axon, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters.
0043203	name:Name:axon hillock	info:Definition:Portion of the neuronal cell soma from which the axon originates.
0043679	name:Name:axon terminus	name:Synonym:axon terminal	name:Synonym:axon terminal specialization	name:Synonym:nerve ending	info:Definition:Terminal inflated portion of the axon, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters. The axon terminus is considered to be the whole region of thickening and the terminal button is a specialized region of it.
0044224	name:Name:juxtaparanode region of axon	name:Synonym:juxtaparanodal region	name:Synonym:juxtaparanode	info:Definition:A region of an axon near a node of Ranvier that is between the paranode and internode regions.
0044303	name:Name:axon collateral	info:Definition:Any of the smaller branches of an axon that emanate from the main axon cylinder.
0044304	name:Name:main axon	name:Synonym:axon trunk	info:Definition:The main axonal trunk, as opposed to the collaterals.
0044308	name:Name:axonal spine	name:Synonym:axon spine	info:Definition:A spine that originates from the axon, usually from the initial segment.
0035619	name:Name:root hair tip	name:Synonym:root hair cell tip	info:Definition:The tip portion of an outgrowth of a root epidermal cell.
0043197	name:Name:dendritic spine	name:Synonym:dendrite spine	info:Definition:Protrusion from a dendrite. Spines are specialised subcellular compartments involved in the synaptic transmission. They are linked to the dendritic shaft by a restriction. Because of their bulb shape, they function as a biochemical and an electrical compartment. Spine remodeling is though to be involved in synaptic plasticity.
0043198	name:Name:dendritic shaft	info:Definition:Cylindric portion of the dendrite, directly stemming from the perikaryon, and carrying the dendritic spines.
0044292	name:Name:dendrite terminus	name:Synonym:dendrite terminal	name:Synonym:dendrite terminal specialization	name:Synonym:terminal specialization of a dendrite	info:Definition:A structure at the distal end of a dendrite adapted to carry out a specific function, e.g. dendriole.
0044293	name:Name:dendriole	info:Definition:Small dendrites that makes up a brush structure found as the terminal specialization of a dendrite of a unipolar brush cell (UBC).
0044296	name:Name:dendritic tuft	name:Synonym:dendrite tuft	info:Definition:The terminal specialization found in some types of dendrites which consists of numerous small terminal branches, giving the dendrite a tufted appearance.
0044306	name:Name:neuron projection terminus	name:Synonym:neuron projection terminal	name:Synonym:neuron terminal specialization	info:Definition:The specialized, terminal region of a neuron projection such as an axon or a dendrite.
0044307	name:Name:dendritic branch	name:Synonym:dendrite branch	info:Definition:A dendrite arising from another dendrite.
0044326	name:Name:dendritic spine neck	info:Definition:Part of the dendritic spine that connects the dendritic shaft to the head of the dendritic spine.
0044327	name:Name:dendritic spine head	info:Definition:Distal part of the dendritic spine, that carries the post-synaptic density.
0090405	name:Name:unicellular trichome branch	info:Definition:A cell projection part that is a branch of a unicellular trichome.
0045177	name:Name:apical part of cell	info:Definition:The region of a polarized cell that forms a tip or is distal to a base. For example, in a polarized epithelial cell, the apical region has an exposed surface and lies opposite to the basal lamina that separates the epithelium from other tissue.
0045178	name:Name:basal part of cell	info:Definition:The region of a cell situated near the base. For example, in a polarized epithelial cell, the basal surface rests on the basal lamina that separates the epithelium from other tissue.
0051286	name:Name:cell tip	name:Synonym:cell end	info:Definition:The region at either end of the longest axis of a cylindrical or elongated cell.
0035839	name:Name:non-growing cell tip	name:Synonym:new cell end	name:Synonym:non-growing cell end	info:Definition:A cell tip at which no growth takes place. For example, in fission yeast the cell end newly formed by cell division does not grow immediately upon its formation, and lacks actin cytoskeletal structures.
0060187	name:Name:cell pole	info:Definition:Either of two different areas at opposite ends of an axis of a cell.
0044225	name:Name:apical pole of neuron	info:Definition:Portion of a neuron cell soma closest to the point where the apical dendrite emerges.
0044226	name:Name:basal pole of neuron	info:Definition:Portion of a neuron cell soma closest to the point where the basilar dendrite emerges.
0070258	name:Name:inner membrane complex	info:Definition:A membrane structure formed of two closely aligned lipid bilayers that lie beneath the plasma membrane and form part of the pellicle surrounding an apicomplexan parasite cell.
0070938	name:Name:contractile ring	name:Synonym:constriction ring	name:Synonym:cytokinetic ring	info:Definition:A cytoskeletal structure composed of filamentous protein that forms beneath the membrane of many cells or organelles, in the plane of cell or organelle division. Ring contraction is associated with centripetal growth of the membrane that divides the cytoplasm of the two daughter cells or organelles.
0071944	name:Name:cell periphery	info:Definition:The part of a cell encompassing the cell cortex, the plasma membrane, and any external encapsulating structures.
0045202	name:Name:synapse	name:Synonym:synaptic junction	info:Definition:The junction between a nerve fiber of one neuron and another neuron or muscle fiber or glial cell; the site of interneuronal communication. As the nerve fiber approaches the synapse it enlarges into a specialized structure, the presynaptic nerve ending, which contains mitochondria and synaptic vesicles. At the tip of the nerve ending is the presynaptic membrane; facing it, and separated from it by a minute cleft (the synaptic cleft) is a specialized area of membrane on the receiving cell, known as the postsynaptic membrane. In response to the arrival of nerve impulses, the presynaptic nerve ending secretes molecules of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. These diffuse across the cleft and transmit the signal to the postsynaptic membrane.
0031594	name:Name:neuromuscular junction	info:Definition:The junction between the axon of a motor neuron and a muscle fiber. In response to the arrival of action potentials, the presynaptic button releases molecules of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. These diffuse across the cleft and transmit the signal to the postsynaptic membrane of the muscle fiber, leading to a post-synaptic potential responsible of the muscle contraction.
0032279	name:Name:asymmetric synapse	info:Definition:A type of synapse occurring between an axon and a dendritic spine or dendritic shaft. Asymmetric synapses, the most abundant synapse type in the central nervous system, involve axons that contain predominantly spherical vesicles and contain a thickened postsynaptic density.
0032280	name:Name:symmetric synapse	info:Definition:A type of synapse occurring primarily on dendrite shafts and neuronal cell bodies. Symmetric synapses involve axons containing clusters of predominantly flattened or elongated vesicles and do not contain a prominent postsynaptic density.
0060076	name:Name:excitatory synapse	info:Definition:A synapse in which an action potential in the presynaptic cell increases the probability of an action potential occurring in the postsynaptic cell.
0060077	name:Name:inhibitory synapse	info:Definition:A synapse in which an action potential in the presynaptic cell reduces the probability of an action potential occurring in the postsynaptic cell.
0055044	name:Name:symplast	info:Definition:The interconnected cell membranes and intracellular regions of a plant. The interconnections occur via the plasmodesmata.
0008150	name:Name:biological_process	name:Synonym:biological process	name:Synonym:biological process unknown	name:Synonym:physiological process	info:Definition:Any process specifically pertinent to the functioning of integrated living units: cells, tissues, organs, and organisms. A process is a collection of molecular events with a defined beginning and end.
0000003	name:Name:reproduction	name:Synonym:reproductive physiological process	info:Definition:The production by an organism of new individuals that contain some portion of their genetic material inherited from that organism.
0019953	name:Name:sexual reproduction	info:Definition:The regular alternation, in the life cycle of haplontic, diplontic and diplohaplontic organisms, of meiosis and fertilization which provides for the production offspring. In diplontic organisms there is a life cycle in which the products of meiosis behave directly as gametes, fusing to form a zygote from which the diploid, or sexually reproductive polyploid, adult organism will develop. In diplohaplontic organisms a haploid phase (gametophyte) exists in the life cycle between meiosis and fertilization (e.g. higher plants, many algae and Fungi); the products of meiosis are spores that develop as haploid individuals from which haploid gametes develop to form a diploid zygote; diplohaplontic organisms show an alternation of haploid and diploid generations. In haplontic organisms meiosis occurs in the zygote, giving rise to four haploid cells (e.g. many algae and protozoa), only the zygote is diploid and this may form a resistant spore, tiding organisms over hard times.
0000747	name:Name:conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:cell fusion	name:Synonym:mating	info:Definition:A conjugation process that results in the union of cellular and genetic information from compatible mating types. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0034293	name:Name:sexual sporulation	name:Synonym:meiotic spore formation	name:Synonym:meiotic sporulation	name:Synonym:sexual spore formation	info:Definition:The formation of spores derived from the products of meiosis.
0043935	name:Name:sexual sporulation resulting in formation of a cellular spore	info:Definition:The formation of spores derived from the products of meiosis. A cellular spore is a cell form that can be used for dissemination, for survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for reproduction.
0075285	name:Name:sexual sporulation resulting in formation of a multicellular or syncytial spore	info:Definition:The formation of multicellular or syncytial spore via septations derived from meiosis. A multicellular or syncytial spore is a structure that can be used for dissemination, for survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for reproduction.
0019954	name:Name:asexual reproduction	info:Definition:The biological process in which new individuals are produced by either a single cell or a group of cells, in the absence of any sexual process.
0007114	name:Name:cell budding	name:Synonym:budding	info:Definition:A form of asexual reproduction, occurring in certain bacteria and fungi (e.g. yeasts) and some primitive animals in which an individual arises from a daughter cell formed by pinching off a part of the parent cell. The budlike outgrowths so formed may sometimes remain attached to the parent cell.
0007120	name:Name:axial cellular bud site selection	name:Synonym:axial bud site selection	name:Synonym:axial budding	info:Definition:The process of defining the next site of bud emergence adjacent to the last site of bud emergence on a budding cell.
0007121	name:Name:bipolar cellular bud site selection	name:Synonym:bipolar bud site selection	name:Synonym:bipolar budding	name:Synonym:polar budding	info:Definition:The process of defining subsequent sites of bud emergence such that budding takes place at alternating poles of a budding cell.
0030436	name:Name:asexual sporulation	name:Synonym:asexual spore formation	name:Synonym:mitotic spore formation	name:Synonym:mitotic sporulation	info:Definition:The formation of spores derived from the products of mitosis. Examples of this process are found in Bacterial species.
0034297	name:Name:oidium formation	info:Definition:The process in which oidia, a type of asexual spore found in fungi, are formed. Oidia are borne a few at a time on very simple hyphae that protrude a short distance into the substrate, and are usually presumed not to constitute the main reproductive strategy of the fungus.
0043936	name:Name:asexual sporulation resulting in formation of a cellular spore	info:Definition:The formation of a cellular spore derived from the products of mitosis. A cellular spore is a cell form that can be used for dissemination, for survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for reproduction.
0048315	name:Name:conidium formation	name:Synonym:conidia biosynthesis	name:Synonym:conidia formation	info:Definition:Formation of asexual, nonmotile spores in fungi, by conversion of hyphal elements or arising from specialized sporogenous cells.
0075284	name:Name:asexual sporulation resulting in formation of a multicellular or syncytial spore	info:Definition:The formation of a multicellular or syncytial spore via septations derived from mitosis.
0075321	name:Name:oomycete sporangium development	info:Definition:The process that leads to the development of an oomycete sporangium, a single-celled or many-celled structure that germinates directly to form an infection hypha or differentiates, through specialized cleavage vesicles, into between 10 and 30 zoospores, which are laterally flagellated.
0043093	name:Name:cytokinesis by binary fission	name:Synonym:prokaryote-type cytokinesis	name:Synonym:prokaryotic fission	info:Definition:A cytokinesis process that involves a set of conserved proteins including FtsZ, and results in the formation of two similarly sized and shaped cells; the process in which prokaryotic cells divide.
0048624	name:Name:plantlet formation on parent plant	name:Synonym:vegetative vivipary	name:Synonym:vivipary	info:Definition:The process in which a new plantlet develops from a meristem on the plant body. As part of this process, when the plantlet is large enough to live independently, the physical connection between the new plantlet and the main plant is severed.
0032504	name:Name:multicellular organism reproduction	info:Definition:The biological process in which new individuals are produced by one or two multicellular organisms. The new individuals inherit some proportion of their genetic material from the parent or parents.
0032505	name:Name:reproduction of a single-celled organism	info:Definition:The biological process in which new individuals are produced by one or two single-celled organisms. The new individuals inherit some proportion of their genetic material from the parent or parents.
0001906	name:Name:cell killing	name:Synonym:necrosis	info:Definition:Any process in an organism that results in the killing of its own cells or those of another organism, including in some cases the death of the other organism. Killing here refers to the induction of death in one cell by another cell, not cell-autonomous death due to internal or other environmental conditions.
0001909	name:Name:leukocyte mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:immune cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:immune cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:immune cell mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:leucocyte mediated cytotoxicity	info:Definition:The directed killing of a target cell by a leukocyte.
0001788	name:Name:antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:ADCC	name:Synonym:antibody dependent cell death	name:Synonym:antibody dependent cell killing	name:Synonym:antibody-dependent cell death	name:Synonym:antibody-dependent cell killing	name:Synonym:type VI hypersensitivity	info:Definition:Cytolysis of target cells by natural killer cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, monocytes, or macrophages following engagement of antibodies bound to the target cells by Fc receptors on the effector cells.
0001913	name:Name:T cell mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:T cell mediated apoptosis	name:Synonym:T cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:T cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:T cell mediated cytolysis	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:T-cell mediated apoptosis	name:Synonym:T-cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:T-cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:T-cell mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte mediated cytotoxicity	info:Definition:The directed killing of a target cell by a T cell through the release of granules containing cytotoxic mediators or through the engagement of death receptors.
0002419	name:Name:T cell mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	name:Synonym:T-cell mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	info:Definition:The directed killing of a tumor cell by a T cell through the release of granules containing cytotoxic mediators or through the engagement of death receptors.
0042267	name:Name:natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:killer activity	name:Synonym:natural killer cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:natural killer cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:natural killer cell mediated cytolysis	name:Synonym:natural killer-cell mediated cytolysis	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated cytolysis	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated cytotoxicity	info:Definition:The directed killing of a target cell by a natural killer cell through the release of granules containing cytotoxic mediators or through the engagement of death receptors.
0002420	name:Name:natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated cytotoxicity directed against tumor cell target	info:Definition:The directed killing of a tumor cell by a natural killer cell through the release of granules containing cytotoxic mediators or through the engagement of death receptors.
0070942	name:Name:neutrophil mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:neutrophil mediated cell killing	info:Definition:The directed killing of a target cell by a neutrophil.
0070943	name:Name:neutrophil mediated killing of symbiont cell	info:Definition:The directed killing of a symbiont target cell by a neutrophil.
0031640	name:Name:killing of cells of other organism	name:Synonym:killing of cells of another organism	name:Synonym:killing of cells of another, non-host, organism	info:Definition:Any process in an organism that results in the killing of cells of another organism, including in some cases the death of the other organism. Killing here refers to the induction of death in one cell by another cell, not cell-autonomous death due to internal or other environmental conditions.
0051715	name:Name:cytolysis in other organism	name:Synonym:cytolysis of cells of another organism	name:Synonym:cytolysis of cells of another, non-host, organism	name:Synonym:cytolysis of cells of competing organism	info:Definition:The killing by an organism of a cell in another organism by means of the rupture of cell membranes and the loss of cytoplasm.
0044179	name:Name:hemolysis in other organism	name:Synonym:hemolysis of cells in other organism	name:Synonym:hemolysis of erythrocytes in other organism	name:Synonym:hemolysis of RBCs in other organism	name:Synonym:hemolysis of red blood cells in other organism	info:Definition:The cytolytic destruction of red blood cells, with the release of intracellular hemoglobin, in one organism by another.
0051801	name:Name:cytolysis in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:cytolysis of cells in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:cytolysis of cells in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The killing by an organism of a cell in a second organism by means of the rupture of cell membranes and the loss of cytoplasm, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051883	name:Name:killing of cells in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:killing of cells in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process mediated by an organism that results in the death of cells in a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0001907	name:Name:killing by symbiont of host cells	info:Definition:Any process mediated by an organism that results in the death of cells in the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051873	name:Name:killing by host of symbiont cells	info:Definition:Any process mediated by an organism that results in the death of cells in the symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0002376	name:Name:immune system process	info:Definition:Any process involved in the development or functioning of the immune system, an organismal system for calibrated responses to potential internal or invasive threats.
0001776	name:Name:leukocyte homeostasis	name:Synonym:immune cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:leucocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of cells of the immune system such that the total number of cells of a particular cell type within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0002260	name:Name:lymphocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of lymphocytes such that the total number of lymphocytes within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0001782	name:Name:B cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte homeostasis	name:Synonym:B-cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of B cells such that the total number of B cells within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0002261	name:Name:mucosal lymphocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of lymphocytes such that the total number of lymphocytes within the mucosal tissue of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0043029	name:Name:T cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte homeostasis	name:Synonym:T-cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of T cells such that the total number of T cells within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0035702	name:Name:monocyte homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of monocytes such that the total number of monocytes within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0002200	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors	info:Definition:The somatic process allowing for the production of immune receptors whose specificity is not encoded in the germline genomic sequences.
0002201	name:Name:somatic diversification of DSCAM-based immune receptors	info:Definition:The somatic process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of the DSCAM-based immune receptors of insects.
0002202	name:Name:somatic diversification of variable lymphocyte receptors of jawless fish	info:Definition:The somatic process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of the variable lymphocyte receptors (VLR) of jawless fish.
0002562	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors via germline recombination within a single locus	info:Definition:The process in which immune receptor genes are diversified through recombination of the germline genetic elements within a single genetic locus.
0002681	name:Name:somatic recombination of T cell receptor gene segments	name:Synonym:somatic recombination of TCR gene segments	info:Definition:The process in which T cell receptor genes are formed through recombination of the germline genetic elements, also known as T cell receptor gene segments.
0016447	name:Name:somatic recombination of immunoglobulin gene segments	name:Synonym:somatic recombination of antibody gene segments	info:Definition:The process in which immunoglobulin genes are formed through recombination of the germline genetic elements, as known as immunoglobulin gene segments, within a single locus.
0033151	name:Name:V(D)J recombination	name:Synonym:V(D)J joining	name:Synonym:V-D-J joining	name:Synonym:V-D-J recombination	name:Synonym:V-J joining	name:Synonym:V-J recombination	info:Definition:The process in which immune receptor V, D, and J, or V and J gene segments, depending on the specific receptor, are recombined within a single locus utilizing the conserved heptamer and nonomer recombination signal sequences (RSS).
0002563	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors via alternate splicing	info:Definition:The process in which immune receptor genes are diversified through alternate splicing.
0002564	name:Name:alternate splicing of immunoglobulin genes	name:Synonym:alternate splicing of antibody genes	info:Definition:The generation of alternate transcripts of immunoglobulin genes through alternate splicing of exons.
0002565	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors via gene conversion	info:Definition:The process in which immune receptor genes are diversified through gene conversion.
0002206	name:Name:gene conversion of immunoglobulin genes	name:Synonym:gene conversion of antibody genes	info:Definition:The somatic process in which immunoglobulin genes are diversified through the mechanism of gene conversion.
0002566	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors via somatic mutation	info:Definition:The process in which immune receptor genes are diversified through somatic mutation.
0016446	name:Name:somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes	name:Synonym:somatic hypermutation of antibody genes	info:Definition:Mutations occurring somatically that result in amino acid changes in the rearranged V regions of immunoglobulins.
0002567	name:Name:somatic diversification of FREP-based immune receptors	info:Definition:The process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of the FREP-based immune receptors of snails.
0002568	name:Name:somatic diversification of T cell receptor genes	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of TCR genes	info:Definition:The somatic process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of T cell receptor genes.
0002571	name:Name:somatic diversification of T cell receptor genes by N region addition	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of TCR genes by N region addition	info:Definition:The addition of variable numbers of random nucleotides by terminal deoxytransferase in the N regions of T cell receptor genes. N regions are found at the V-D, D-D, V-J, and D-J recombinational junctions, depending on the T cell receptor gene.
0002569	name:Name:somatic diversification of immune receptors by N region addition	info:Definition:The addition of variable numbers of random nucleotides by terminal deoxytransferase in the N regions of heavy chain immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes. N regions are found at the V-D, D-D, V-J, and D-J recombinational junctions, depending on the immune receptor gene.
0002570	name:Name:somatic diversification of immunoglobulin genes by N region addition	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of antibody genes by N region addition	info:Definition:The addition of variable numbers of random nucleotides by terminal deoxytransferase in the N regions of heavy chain immunoglobulin genes. N regions are found at the V-D and D-J recombinational junctions.
0016445	name:Name:somatic diversification of immunoglobulins	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of antibodies	info:Definition:The somatic process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of immunoglobulins.
0002208	name:Name:somatic diversification of immunoglobulins involved in immune response	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of antibodies during immune response	name:Synonym:somatic diversification of immunoglobulins during immune response	info:Definition:The somatic process that results in the generation of sequence diversity of immunoglobulins after induction, and contributes to an immune response.
0002252	name:Name:immune effector process	info:Definition:Any process of the immune system that can potentially contribute to an immune response.
0002263	name:Name:cell activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:cell activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002264	name:Name:endothelial cell activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:endothelial cell activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of an endothelial cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002265	name:Name:astrocyte activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:astrocyte activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of an astrocyte resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002267	name:Name:follicular dendritic cell activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:follicular dendritic cell activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a follicular dendritic cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002366	name:Name:leukocyte activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:immune cell activation during immune response	name:Synonym:leucocyte activation during immune response	name:Synonym:leukocyte activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of a leukocyte resulting from exposure to a specific antigen, mitogen, cytokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002432	name:Name:granuloma formation	info:Definition:The formation of nodular inflammatory lesions, usually small or granular, firm, persistent, well-structured, and containing compactly grouped T lymphocytes and modified phagocytes such as epithelioid cells, giant cells, and other macrophages. Granuloma formation represents a chronic inflammatory response initiated by various infectious and noninfectious agents. The center of a granuloma consists of fused macrophages, which can become necrotic.
0002433	name:Name:phagocytosis triggered by activation of immune response cell surface activating receptor	info:Definition:Phagocytosis occurring as the result of a ligand binding an immune response cell surface activating receptor.
0002434	name:Name:immune complex clearance	info:Definition:A process directed at removing immune complexes from the body. Immune complexes are clusters of antibodies bound to antigen, to which complement may also be fixed, and which may precipitate or remain in solution.
0002435	name:Name:immune complex clearance by erythrocytes	name:Synonym:immune complex clearance by RBCs	name:Synonym:immune complex clearance by red blood cells	info:Definition:The process of immune complex clearance by erythrocytes.
0002436	name:Name:immune complex clearance by monocytes and macrophages	info:Definition:The process of immune complex clearance by monocytes or macrophages.
0002443	name:Name:leukocyte mediated immunity	name:Synonym:cell-mediated immune response	name:Synonym:cellular immune response	name:Synonym:immune cell effector process	name:Synonym:immune cell mediated immunity	name:Synonym:leucocyte immune effector process	name:Synonym:leucocyte mediated immunity	name:Synonym:leukocyte immune effector process	info:Definition:Any process involved in the carrying out of an immune response by a leukocyte.
0002444	name:Name:myeloid leukocyte mediated immunity	name:Synonym:myeloid leucocyte immune effector process	name:Synonym:myeloid leucocyte mediated immunity	name:Synonym:myeloid leukocyte immune effector process	info:Definition:Any process involved in the carrying out of an immune response by a myeloid leukocyte.
0002449	name:Name:lymphocyte mediated immunity	name:Synonym:cell-mediated immunity	name:Synonym:cellular immune response	info:Definition:Any process involved in the carrying out of an immune response by a lymphocyte.
0002522	name:Name:leukocyte migration involved in immune response	name:Synonym:immune cell migration during immune response	name:Synonym:immune cell trafficking during immune response	name:Synonym:leucocyte migration during immune response	name:Synonym:leucocyte trafficking during immune response	name:Synonym:leukocyte trafficking during immune response	info:Definition:The movement of a leukocyte within or between different tissues and organs of the body as part of an immune response.
0002233	name:Name:leukocyte chemotaxis involved in immune response	name:Synonym:immune cell chemotaxis during immune response	name:Synonym:leucocyte chemotaxis during immune response	info:Definition:The movement of an immune cell in response to an external stimulus a part of an immune response.
0002679	name:Name:respiratory burst involved in defense response	info:Definition:A phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases made as part of a defense response ; this leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals.
0002536	name:Name:respiratory burst involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:oxidative burst during acute inflammatory response 	name:Synonym:production of reactive oxygen species during acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:respiratory burst involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:A phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response; this leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals, resulting in an increase in their intracellular or extracellular levels.
0045728	name:Name:respiratory burst after phagocytosis	name:Synonym:metabolic burst after phagocytosis	name:Synonym:oxidative burst after phagocytosis	info:Definition:A phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases, that occurs in neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages shortly after phagocytosing material. An enhanced uptake of oxygen leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals, which play a part in microbiocidal activity.
0006956	name:Name:complement activation	name:Synonym:complement activity	name:Synonym:complement cascade	name:Synonym:complement response	info:Definition:Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the complement cascade, which allows for the direct killing of microbes, the disposal of immune complexes, and the regulation of other immune processes; the initial steps of complement activation involve one of three pathways, the classical pathway, the alternative pathway, and the lectin pathway, all of which lead to the terminal complement pathway.
0001867	name:Name:complement activation, lectin pathway	name:Synonym:complement cascade, lectin pathway	info:Definition:Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the lectin pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes and the regulation of other immune processes.
0001905	name:Name:activation of membrane attack complex	name:Synonym:activation of MAC	name:Synonym:activation of TCC	name:Synonym:activation of terminal complement complex	name:Synonym:activation of the terminal complement cascade	name:Synonym:MAC assembly	name:Synonym:MAC formation	name:Synonym:membrane attack complex assembly	name:Synonym:membrane attack complex formation	info:Definition:The activation of the membrane attack complex components of the complement cascade which can result in death of a target cell through cytolysis.
0006957	name:Name:complement activation, alternative pathway	name:Synonym:complement cascade, alternative pathway	info:Definition:Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the alternative pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes and the regulation of other immune processes.
0006958	name:Name:complement activation, classical pathway	name:Synonym:complement cascade, classical pathway	info:Definition:Any process involved in the activation of any of the steps of the classical pathway of the complement cascade which allows for the direct killing of microbes, the disposal of immune complexes, and the regulation of other immune processes.
0008228	name:Name:opsonization	info:Definition:The process in which a microorganism (or other particulate material) is rendered more susceptible to phagocytosis by coating with an opsonin, a blood serum protein such as a complement component or antibody.
0009864	name:Name:induced systemic resistance, jasmonic acid mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:induced systemic resistance, jasmonic acid mediated signalling pathway	name:Synonym:jasmonic acid mediated signaling pathway (induced systemic resistance)	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals mediated by jasmonic acid involved in induced systemic resistance.
0009866	name:Name:induced systemic resistance, ethylene mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:ethene mediated signaling pathway (induced systemic resistance)	name:Synonym:ethylene mediated signaling pathway (induced systemic resistance)	name:Synonym:induced systemic resistance, ethene mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:induced systemic resistance, ethene mediated signalling pathway	name:Synonym:induced systemic resistance, ethylene mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals mediated by ethylene (ethene) involved in induced systemic resistance.
0035010	name:Name:encapsulation of foreign target	info:Definition:Events resulting in the formation of a multilayered cellular sheath surrounding an invader and thus preventing its development. This defense mechanism is often seen in insects in response to nematodes or parasitoids, which are too large to be phagocytosed by individual hemocytes. In some organisms the capsule is blackened due to melanization.
0035011	name:Name:melanotic encapsulation of foreign target	info:Definition:Formation of a multilayered, melanized sheath of cells around a foreign invader.
0043299	name:Name:leukocyte degranulation	name:Synonym:immune cell degranulation	name:Synonym:immune cell granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:leucocyte degranulation	name:Synonym:leukocyte granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules by a leukocyte.
0002561	name:Name:basophil degranulation	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as histamine, serotonin, and neutral proteases by a basophil.
0043303	name:Name:mast cell degranulation	name:Synonym:mast cell granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as histamine, serotonin, and neutral proteases by a mast cell.
0043308	name:Name:eosinophil degranulation	name:Synonym:eosinophil granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as major basic protein, eosinophil peroxidase, and eosinophil cationic protein by an eosinophil.
0043312	name:Name:neutrophil degranulation	name:Synonym:heterophil degranulation	name:Synonym:neutrophil granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as proteases, lipases, and inflammatory mediators by a neutrophil.
0043316	name:Name:cytotoxic T cell degranulation	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T cell granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T lymphocyte degranulation	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T lymphocyte granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T-cell degranulation	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T-cell granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T-lymphocyte degranulation	name:Synonym:cytotoxic T-lymphocyte granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as perforin and granzymes by a cytotoxic T cell.
0043320	name:Name:natural killer cell degranulation	name:Synonym:natural killer cell granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:NK cell degranulation	name:Synonym:NK cell granule exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as perforin and granzymes by a natural killer cell.
0051607	name:Name:defense response to virus	name:Synonym:antiviral response	name:Synonym:defence response to virus	name:Synonym:defense response to viruses	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a virus that act to protect the cell or organism.
0009616	name:Name:virus induced gene silencing	name:Synonym:VIGS	name:Synonym:virus-induced gene silencing	info:Definition:Specific posttranscriptional gene inactivation ('silencing') both of viral gene(s), and host gene(s) homologous to the viral genes. This silencing is triggered by viral infection, and occurs through a specific decrease in the level of mRNA of both host and viral genes.
0090401	name:Name:viral-induced premature senescence	info:Definition:A cellular senescence process associated with the dismantling of a cell as a response to viral infection.
0002253	name:Name:activation of immune response	info:Definition:Any process that initiates an immune response.
0002218	name:Name:activation of innate immune response	info:Definition:Any process that initiates an innate immune response. Innate immune responses are defense responses mediated by germline encoded components that directly recognize components of potential pathogens. Examples of this process include activation of the hypersensitive response of Arabidopsis thaliana and activation of any NOD or TLR signaling pathway in vertebrate species.
0002758	name:Name:innate immune response-activating signal transduction	info:Definition:The cascade of processes by which a signal interacts with a receptor, causing a change in the level or activity of a second messenger or other downstream target, and ultimately leading to activation or perpetuation of an innate immune response.
0009870	name:Name:defense response signaling pathway, resistance gene-dependent	name:Synonym:defence response signaling pathway, resistance gene-dependent	name:Synonym:defence response signalling pathway, resistance gene-dependent	name:Synonym:defense response signalling pathway, resistance gene-dependent	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals that depends upon R-genes and is activated during defense response.
0010204	name:Name:defense response signaling pathway, resistance gene-independent	name:Synonym:defence response signaling pathway, resistance gene-independent	name:Synonym:defence response signalling pathway, resistance gene-independent	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals that is activated during defense response and does not depend upon R-genes.
0002757	name:Name:immune response-activating signal transduction	info:Definition:The cascade of processes by which a signal interacts with a receptor, causing a change in the level or activity of a second messenger or other downstream target, and ultimately leading to activation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002429	name:Name:immune response-activating cell surface receptor signaling pathway	name:Synonym:activation of immune response by cell surface receptor signaling pathway	name:Synonym:immune response-activating cell surface receptor signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of an extracellular ligand to a receptor on the surface of a cell capable of activating or perpetuating an immune response.
0002262	name:Name:myeloid cell homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of myeloid cells such that the total number of myeloid cells within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0001780	name:Name:neutrophil homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of neutrophils such that the total number of neutrophils within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0033023	name:Name:mast cell homeostasis	info:Definition:The process of regulating the proliferation and elimination of mast cells such that the total number of mast cells within a whole or part of an organism is stable over time in the absence of an outside stimulus.
0002339	name:Name:B cell selection	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:B-cell selection	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process dependent upon B cell antigen receptor signaling in response to self or foreign antigen through which B cells are selected for survival.
0002340	name:Name:central B cell selection	name:Synonym:central B lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:central B-cell selection	name:Synonym:central B-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:Any B cell selection process that occurs in the bone marrow.
0002348	name:Name:central B cell positive selection	name:Synonym:central B lymphocyte positive selection	name:Synonym:central B-cell positive selection	name:Synonym:central B-lymphocyte positive selection	info:Definition:Any process leading to positive selection of B cells in the bone marrow. Positive selection is the process in which B or T cells are selected to survive based on signaling through their antigen receptors.
0002354	name:Name:central B cell negative selection	name:Synonym:central B lymphocyte negative selection	name:Synonym:central B-cell negative selection	name:Synonym:central B-lymphocyte negative selection	info:Definition:Any process leading to negative selection of B cells in the bone marrow.
0002343	name:Name:peripheral B cell selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-cell selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:Any B cell selection process that occurs in the periphery.
0002344	name:Name:B cell affinity maturation	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte affinity maturation	name:Synonym:B-cell affinity maturation	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte affinity maturation	info:Definition:The process in which B cells produce antibodies with increased antigen affinity. This is accomplished by somatic hypermutation and selection for B cells which produce higher affinity antibodies to antigen.
0002350	name:Name:peripheral B cell positive selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B lymphocyte positive selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-cell positive selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-lymphocyte positive selection	info:Definition:Any process leading to positive selection of B cells in the periphery. Positive selection is the process in which B or T cells are selected to survive based on signaling through their antigen receptors.
0002356	name:Name:peripheral B cell negative selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B lymphocyte negative selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-cell negative selection	name:Synonym:peripheral B-lymphocyte negative selection	info:Definition:Any process leading to negative selection of B cells in the periphery.
0002346	name:Name:B cell positive selection	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte positive selection	name:Synonym:B-cell positive selection	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte positive selection	info:Definition:Any process in which B cells are selected to survive based on signaling through the B cell antigen receptor.
0002352	name:Name:B cell negative selection	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte negative selection	name:Synonym:B-cell negative selection	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte negative selection	info:Definition:Any process leading to negative selection in B cells. Mechanisms of negative selection include anergy and deletion.
0002404	name:Name:antigen sampling in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	name:Synonym:antigen sampling in MALT	name:Synonym:antigen transport in MALT	name:Synonym:antigen transport in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	info:Definition:The process of apical-to-basolateral delivery of soluble and particulate antigens to underlying mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.
0002405	name:Name:antigen sampling by dendritic cells in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	name:Synonym:antigen sampling by dendritic cells in MALT	info:Definition:The process of antigen sampling carried out by dendritic cells in the mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.
0002406	name:Name:antigen sampling by M cells in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	name:Synonym:antigen sampling by M cells in MALT	info:Definition:The process of antigen samples carried out by M cells in the mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.
0002440	name:Name:production of molecular mediator of immune response	name:Synonym:production of cellular mediator of immune response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of any molecular mediator of the immune response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002367	name:Name:cytokine production involved in immune response	name:Synonym:cytokine production during immune response	info:Definition:The appearance of a cytokine due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus contributing to an immune response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002368	name:Name:B cell cytokine production	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte cytokine production	name:Synonym:B-cell cytokine production	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to cytokine production by a B cell.
0002369	name:Name:T cell cytokine production	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte cytokine production	name:Synonym:T-cell cytokine production	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to cytokine production by a T cell.
0002370	name:Name:natural killer cell cytokine production	name:Synonym:NK cell cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to cytokine production by a natural killer cell.
0002371	name:Name:dendritic cell cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to cytokine production by a dendritic cell.
0061082	name:Name:myeloid leukocyte cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to cytokine production by a myeloid cell.
0002377	name:Name:immunoglobulin production	name:Synonym:antibody production	info:Definition:The appearance of immunoglobulin due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002381	name:Name:immunoglobulin production involved in immunoglobulin mediated immune response	name:Synonym:antibody production during immune response	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin production during immune response	name:Synonym:immunoglobulin production involved in immune response	info:Definition:The appearance of immunoglobulin due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus during an immune response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002775	name:Name:antimicrobial peptide production	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of an antimicrobial peptide during an immune response, resulting in an increase in intracellular or extracellular levels. Such peptides may have protective properties against bacteria, fungi, viruses, or protozoa.
0002778	name:Name:antibacterial peptide production	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of an antibacterial peptide during an immune response, resulting in an increase in intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002781	name:Name:antifungal peptide production	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of an antifungal peptide during an immune response, resulting in an increase in intracellular or extracellular levels.
0035746	name:Name:granzyme A production	info:Definition:The appearance of granzyme A due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0035944	name:Name:perforin production	info:Definition:The appearance of a perforin protein due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071613	name:Name:granzyme B production	info:Definition:The appearance of granzyme B due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090323	name:Name:prostaglandin secretion involved in immune response	info:Definition:The regulated release of a prostaglandin that contributes to the immune response. Prostaglandins are a group of biologically active metabolites which contain a cyclopentane ring.
0002507	name:Name:tolerance induction	info:Definition:A process that directly activates any of the steps required for tolerance, a physiologic state in which the immune system does not react destructively against the components of an organism that harbors it or against antigens that are introduced to it.
0002249	name:Name:lymphocyte anergy	info:Definition:Any process contributing to lymphocyte anergy, a state of functional inactivation.
0002515	name:Name:B cell anergy	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte anergy	name:Synonym:B-cell anergy	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte anergy	info:Definition:Any process contributing to anergy in B cells, a state of functional inactivation which is part of B cell tolerance induction.
0002870	name:Name:T cell anergy	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte anergy	name:Synonym:T-cell anergy	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte anergy	info:Definition:Any process contributing to anergy in T cells, a state of functional inactivation which is part of T cell tolerance induction.
0002461	name:Name:tolerance induction dependent upon immune response	name:Synonym:immune response-dependent tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction dependent upon an immune response, typically a response by a mature T or B cell in the periphery resulting tolerance towards an antigen via induction of anergy, cellular deletion, or regulatory T cell activation.
0002462	name:Name:tolerance induction to nonself antigen	info:Definition:Tolerance induction in response to nonself antigens.
0002465	name:Name:peripheral tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction in the peripheral lymphoid tissues: blood, lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosal-associated lymphoid tissues.
0002508	name:Name:central tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction in the central lymphoid organs: the thymus and bone marrow.
0002463	name:Name:central tolerance induction to nonself antigen	info:Definition:Tolerance induction to nonself antigens in the central lymphoid organs.
0002509	name:Name:central tolerance induction to self antigen	info:Definition:Tolerance induction in the central lymphoid organs directed at self antigens.
0002510	name:Name:central B cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central B lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central B-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central B-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction of B cells in the bone marrow.
0002512	name:Name:central T cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central T lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central T-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:central T-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction of T cells in the thymus.
0002513	name:Name:tolerance induction to self antigen	info:Definition:Tolerance induction directed at self antigens.
0002466	name:Name:peripheral tolerance induction to self antigen	info:Definition:Tolerance induction to self antigens in the peripheral lymphoid tissues: blood, lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosal-associated lymphoid tissues.
0002514	name:Name:B cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:B-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:A process involving any mechanism for tolerance induction in B cells.
0002451	name:Name:peripheral B cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral B lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral B-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral B-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction of mature B cells in the peripheral lymphoid tissues: the blood, lymph nodes, spleen, and mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.
0002517	name:Name:T cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:T-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:A process involving any mechanism for tolerance induction in T cells.
0002458	name:Name:peripheral T cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral T lymphocyte tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral T-cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:peripheral T-lymphocyte tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction of T cells in the periphery, in this case, any location in the body other than the thymus.
0002519	name:Name:natural killer cell tolerance induction	name:Synonym:NK cell tolerance induction	info:Definition:Tolerance induction of natural killer cells.
0010931	name:Name:macrophage tolerance induction	info:Definition:A process involving any mechanism for tolerance induction in macrophages.
0072573	name:Name:tolerance induction to lipopolysaccharide	name:Synonym:tolerance induction to endotoxin	name:Synonym:tolerance induction to LPS	info:Definition:Tolerance induction directed at lipopolysaccharide antigens.
0002520	name:Name:immune system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an organismal system whose objective is to provide calibrated responses by an organism to a potential internal or invasive threat, over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A system is a regularly interacting or interdependent group of organs or tissues that work together to carry out a given biological process.
0006955	name:Name:immune response	info:Definition:Any immune system process that functions in the calibrated response of an organism to a potential internal or invasive threat.
0002250	name:Name:adaptive immune response	name:Synonym:acquired immune response	info:Definition:An immune response based on directed amplification of specific receptors for antigen produced through a somatic diversification process, and allowing for enhanced response to subsequent exposures to the same antigen (immunological memory).
0002459	name:Name:adaptive immune response based on somatic recombination of immune receptors built from leucine-rich repeat domains	name:Synonym:adaptive immune response based on somatic recombination of variable lymphocyte receptors built from leucine-rich repeat domains	name:Synonym:adaptive immune response based on somatic recombination of VLR built from LRR domains	name:Synonym:adaptive immune response in jawless fish	info:Definition:An immune response based on directed amplification of specific receptors for antigen produced through a somatic diversification process that includes somatic recombination of variable lymphocyte receptors (VLR) incorporating leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains, and allowing for enhanced responses upon subsequent exposures to the same antigen (immunological memory). Examples of this process are found in jawless fish, including the lampreys (Petromyzontidae) and hagfishes (Myxinidae).
0002460	name:Name:adaptive immune response based on somatic recombination of immune receptors built from immunoglobulin superfamily domains	info:Definition:An immune response based on directed amplification of specific receptors for antigen produced through a somatic diversification process that includes somatic recombination of germline gene segments encoding immunoglobulin superfamily domains, and allowing for enhanced responses upon subsequent exposures to the same antigen (immunological memory). Recombined receptors for antigen encoded by immunoglobulin superfamily domains include T cell receptors and immunoglobulins (antibodies). An example of this is the adaptive immune response found in Mus musculus.
0002251	name:Name:organ or tissue specific immune response	name:Synonym:immune response in organ or tissue	info:Definition:An immune response taking place in an organ or tissues such as the liver, brain, mucosa, or nervous system tissues.
0002383	name:Name:immune response in brain or nervous system	info:Definition:An immune response taking place in the brain or nervous system.
0002384	name:Name:hepatic immune response	info:Definition:An immune response taking place in the liver.
0002385	name:Name:mucosal immune response	info:Definition:An immune response taking place in mucosal tissues, including those of the intestinal tract, nasal and upper respiratory tract, and genital tract.
0002418	name:Name:immune response to tumor cell	info:Definition:An immune system process that functions in the response of an organism to a tumor cell.
0002413	name:Name:tolerance induction to tumor cell	info:Definition:A process of tolerance induction which leads to immunological tolerance of a tumor.
0002423	name:Name:natural killer cell mediated immune response to tumor cell	info:Definition:An immune response mediated by a natural killer cell triggered in response to the presence of a tumor cell.
0002424	name:Name:T cell mediated immune response to tumor cell	info:Definition:An immune response mediated by a T cell triggered in response to the presence of a tumor cell.
0002437	name:Name:inflammatory response to antigenic stimulus	info:Definition:An inflammatory response to an antigenic stimulus, which can be include any number of T cell or B cell epitopes.
0002438	name:Name:acute inflammatory response to antigenic stimulus	info:Definition:An acute inflammatory response to an antigenic stimulus. An acute inflammatory response occurs within a matter of minutes or hours, and either resolves within a few days or becomes a chronic inflammatory response.
0002439	name:Name:chronic inflammatory response to antigenic stimulus	info:Definition:A chronic inflammatory response to an antigenic stimulus. A chronic inflammatory response persists indefinitely during days, weeks, or months in the life of an individual.
0006959	name:Name:humoral immune response	info:Definition:An immune response mediated through a body fluid.
0002455	name:Name:humoral immune response mediated by circulating immunoglobulin	name:Synonym:circulating antibody mediated immune response	name:Synonym:circulating immunoglobulin mediated immune response	name:Synonym:humoral defence mechanism	name:Synonym:humoral immune response mediated by circulating antibody	info:Definition:An immune response dependent upon secreted immunoglobulin. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0019730	name:Name:antimicrobial humoral response	info:Definition:An immune response against microbes mediated through a body fluid. Examples of this process are seen in the antimicrobial humoral response of Drosophila melanogaster and Mus musculus.
0042381	name:Name:hemolymph coagulation	name:Synonym:hemolymph clotting	info:Definition:Any process in which factors in the hemolymph (the invertebrate equivalent of vertebrate blood and lymph) precipitate into insoluble clots in order to prevent loss of body fluid, and at the same time prevent the movement of microbes. Hemolymph coagulation is also part of the invertebrate humoral immune response.
0042092	name:Name:type 2 immune response	name:Synonym:T-helper 2 type immune response	name:Synonym:Th2 immune response	info:Definition:An immune response which is associated with resistance to extracellular organisms such as helminths and pathological conditions such as allergy, which is orchestrated by the production of particular cytokines, most notably IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13, by any of a variety of cell types including T-helper 2 cells, eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and nuocytes, resulting in enhanced production of certain antibody isotypes and other effects.
0045087	name:Name:innate immune response	name:Synonym:nonspecific immune response	info:Definition:Innate immune responses are defense responses mediated by germline encoded components that directly recognize components of potential pathogens.
0002227	name:Name:innate immune response in mucosa	info:Definition:Any process of the innate immune response that takes place in the mucosal tissues.
0002228	name:Name:natural killer cell mediated immunity	name:Synonym:NK cell mediated immunity	info:Definition:The promotion of an immune response by natural killer cells through direct recognition of target cells or through the release of cytokines.
0009626	name:Name:plant-type hypersensitive response	name:Synonym:HR	name:Synonym:HR-PCD	name:Synonym:plant hypersensitive response	info:Definition:The rapid, localized death of plant cells in response to invasion by a pathogen.
0009682	name:Name:induced systemic resistance	info:Definition:A response to non-pathogenic bacteria that confers broad spectrum systemic resistance to disease that does not depend upon salicylic acid signaling.
0009814	name:Name:defense response, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:defence response incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:defence response to pathogen, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:resistance response to pathogen	name:Synonym:response to pathogen (incompatible interaction)	info:Definition:A response of a plant to a pathogenic agent that prevents the occurrence or spread of disease.
0035006	name:Name:melanization defense response	name:Synonym:melanization defence response	info:Definition:The blackening of the wounded area of the cuticle or the surface of invading pathogens, parasites or parasitoids, resulting from a proteolytic cascade leading to the de novo synthesis and deposition of melanin.
0019882	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:antigen presentation	name:Synonym:antigen processing	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002450	name:Name:B cell antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:B-cell antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a B cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002417	name:Name:B cell antigen processing and presentation mediated by B cell receptor uptake of antigen	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation mediated by B cell receptor uptake of antigen	name:Synonym:B-cell antigen processing and presentation mediated by B cell receptor uptake of antigen	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation mediated by B cell receptor uptake of antigen	info:Definition:B cell antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen bound to the B cell receptor.
0002421	name:Name:B cell antigen processing and presentation following pinocytosis	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation following pinocytosis	name:Synonym:B-cell antigen processing and presentation following pinocytosis	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation following pinocytosis	info:Definition:B cell antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen via pinocytosis.
0002457	name:Name:T cell antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:T-cell antigen processing and presentation	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a T cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002468	name:Name:dendritic cell antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a dendritic cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002469	name:Name:myeloid dendritic cell antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a myeloid dendritic cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002470	name:Name:plasmacytoid dendritic cell antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a plasmacytoid dendritic cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002471	name:Name:monocyte antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a monocyte expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002472	name:Name:macrophage antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a macrophage expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002473	name:Name:non-professional antigen presenting cell antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which a non-professional antigen presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex. Non-professional antigen presenting cells include all cell types but dendritic cells, B cells, T cells, monocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils.
0002475	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation via MHC class Ib	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) on its cell surface in association with an MHC class Ib protein complex. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 or HLA-E gene families.
0002428	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via MHC class Ib	name:Synonym:peptide antigen processing and presentation via MHC class Ib	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses peptide antigen in association with an MHC class Ib protein complex on its cell surface. The peptide antigen may originate from an endogenous or exogenous protein. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the HLA-E family.
0048003	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of lipid antigen via MHC class Ib	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, lipid antigen	name:Synonym:lipid antigen processing and presentation via MHC class Ib	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses lipid antigen in association with an MHC class Ib protein complex on its cell surface, including lipid extraction, degradation, and transport steps for the lipid antigen both prior to and following assembly with the MHC protein complex. The lipid antigen may originate from an endogenous or exogenous source of lipid. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 family.
0002504	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of peptide or polysaccharide antigen via MHC class II	name:Synonym:peptide or polysaccharide antigen processing and presentation of via MHC class II	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or polysaccharide) on its cell surface in association with an MHC class II protein complex.
0002495	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via MHC class II	name:Synonym:peptide antigen processing and presentation via MHC class II	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen on its cell surface in association with an MHC class II protein complex. The peptide antigen is typically, but not always, processed from a whole protein.
0002505	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of polysaccharide antigen via MHC class II	name:Synonym:polysaccharide antigen processing and presentation via MHC class II	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a polysaccharide antigen on its cell surface in association with an MHC class II protein complex.
0002745	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation initiated by receptor mediated uptake of antigen	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen bound to a cell surface receptor.
0002748	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation initiated by pattern recognition receptor mediated uptake of antigen	name:Synonym:antigen processing and presentation initiated by PAMP receptor mediated uptake of antigen	name:Synonym:antigen processing and presentation initiated by PRR mediated uptake of antigen	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen bound to a cell surface pattern recognition receptor (PRR).
0002751	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation following receptor mediated endocytosis	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen receptor-mediated endocytosis.
0002746	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation following pinocytosis	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen via pinocytosis.
0002750	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation following macropinocytosis	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen via macropinocytosis.
0002747	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation following phagocytosis	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by uptake of antigen via phagocytosis.
0002749	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation initiated by toll-like receptor mediated phagocytosis of antigen	name:Synonym:antigen processing and presentation initiated by TLR mediated phagocytosis of antigen	info:Definition:Antigen processing and presentation which is initiated by phagocytosis of antigen bound directly or indirectly to a cell surface toll-like receptor (TLR).
0019883	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of endogenous antigen	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, endogenous antigen	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) of endogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002483	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of endogenous peptide antigen	name:Synonym:endogenous peptide antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen of endogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex. The peptide is typically a fragment of a larger endogenous protein which has been degraded within the cell.
0048006	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation, endogenous lipid antigen via MHC class Ib	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, endogenous lipid antigen	name:Synonym:endogenous lipid antigen processing and presentation via MHC class Ib	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses lipid antigen of endogenous origin in association with an MHC class Ib protein complex on its cell surface. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 family.
0019884	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of exogenous antigen	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, exogenous antigen	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses antigen (peptide or lipid) of exogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex.
0002478	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen	name:Synonym:exogenous peptide antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen of exogenous origin on its cell surface in association with an MHC protein complex. The peptide is typically a fragment of a larger exogenous protein which has been degraded within the cell.
0048007	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation, exogenous lipid antigen via MHC class Ib	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, exogenous peptide antigen	name:Synonym:exogenous lipid antigen processing and presentation via MHC class Ib	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses lipid antigen of exogenous origin in association with an MHC class Ib protein complex on its cell surface. Class Ib here refers to non-classical class I molecules, such as those of the CD1 family.
0048002	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen	name:Synonym:antigen presentation, peptide antigen	name:Synonym:peptide antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses peptide antigen in association with an MHC protein complex on its cell surface, including proteolysis and transport steps for the peptide antigen both prior to and following assembly with the MHC protein complex. The peptide antigen is typically, but not always, processed from an endogenous or exogenous protein.
0002474	name:Name:antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen via MHC class I	name:Synonym:peptide antigen processing and presentation via MHC class I	info:Definition:The process in which an antigen-presenting cell expresses a peptide antigen on its cell surface in association with an MHC class I protein complex. Class I here refers to classical class I molecules.
0031294	name:Name:lymphocyte costimulation	name:Synonym:lymphocyte co-stimulation	info:Definition:The process of providing, via surface-bound receptor-ligand pairs, a second, antigen-independent, signal in addition to that provided by the B- or T cell receptor to augment B- or T cell activation.
0031295	name:Name:T cell costimulation	name:Synonym:T cell co-stimulation	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte costimulation	name:Synonym:T-cell co-stimulation	name:Synonym:T-cell costimulation	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte costimulation	info:Definition:The process of providing, via surface-bound receptor-ligand pairs, a second, antigen-independent, signal in addition to that provided by the T cell receptor to augment T cell activation.
0035783	name:Name:CD4-positive, alpha beta T cell costimulation	info:Definition:The process of providing, via surface-bound receptor-ligand pairs, a second, antigen-independent, signal in addition to that provided by the T cell receptor to augment CD4-positive, alpha beta T cell activation.
0031296	name:Name:B cell costimulation	name:Synonym:B cell co-stimulation 	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte co-stimulation	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte costimulation	name:Synonym:B-cell co-stimulation	name:Synonym:B-cell costimulation	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte co-stimulation	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte costimulation	info:Definition:The process of providing, via surface-bound receptor-ligand pairs, a second, antigen-independent, signal in addition to that provided by the B cell receptor to augment B cell activation.
0035172	name:Name:hemocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:arthropod blood cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of hemocytes, resulting in the expansion of the cell population. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen.
0042386	name:Name:hemocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:arthropod blood cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the characteristics of a mature hemocyte. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen.
0035163	name:Name:embryonic hemocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:embryonic arthropod blood cell differentiation	name:Synonym:embryonic hemocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell derived from the embryonic head mesoderm acquires the specialized features of a mature hemocyte. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen.
0035164	name:Name:embryonic plasmatocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:embryonic plasmatocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an embryonic mesoderm-derived hemocyte precursor cell acquires the specialized features of the phagocytic blood-cell type, the plasmatocyte.
0035165	name:Name:embryonic crystal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an embryonic mesoderm-derived hemocyte precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a crystal cell. Crystal cells are a class of cells that contain crystalline inclusions and are involved in the melanization of pathogenic material in the hemolymph.
0035168	name:Name:larval lymph gland hemocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:larval lymph gland arthropod blood cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell derived from the larval lymph gland acquires the specialized features of a mature hemocyte. The lymph gland consists of three to six bilaterally paired lobes that are attached to the cardioblasts during larval stages, and it degenerates during pupal stages. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035169	name:Name:lymph gland plasmatocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:lymph gland plasmatocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized larval lymph gland-derived hemocyte precursor cell acquires the specialized features of the phagocytic blood-cell type, the plasmatocyte.
0035170	name:Name:lymph gland crystal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized larval lymph gland-derived hemocyte precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a crystal cell. Crystal cells are a class of cells that contain crystalline inclusions and are involved in the melanization of pathogenic material in the hemolymph.
0035171	name:Name:lamellocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:lamellocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized hemocyte precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a lamellocyte. Lamellocytes are a hemocyte lineage that exists only in larvae, but are seldom observed in healthy animals. Lamellocytes differentiate massively in the lymph glands after parasitization and are large flat cells devoted to encapsulation of invaders too large to be phagocytosed by plasmatocytes.
0042387	name:Name:plasmatocyte differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a hemocyte precursor cell acquires the characteristics of the phagocytic blood-cell type, the plasmatocyte. Plasmatocytes are a class of arthropod hemocytes important in the cellular defense response.
0042688	name:Name:crystal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a hemocyte precursor cell acquires the characteristics of a crystal cell, a class of cells that contain crystalline inclusions and are involved in the melanization of pathogenic material in the hemolymph.
0045058	name:Name:T cell selection	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:T-cell selection	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process in which T cells that express T cell receptors that are restricted by self MHC protein complexes and tolerant to self antigens are selected for further maturation.
0043366	name:Name:beta selection	info:Definition:The process in which successful recombination of a T cell receptor beta chain into a translatable protein coding sequence leads to rescue from apoptosis and subsequent proliferation of an immature T cell.
0043368	name:Name:positive T cell selection	name:Synonym:positive T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:positive T-cell selection	name:Synonym:positive T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of sparing immature T cells which react with self-MHC protein complexes with low affinity levels from apoptotic death.
0045059	name:Name:positive thymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:positive thymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:positive thymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:positive thymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of sparing immature T cells in the thymus which react with self-MHC protein complexes with low affinity levels from apoptotic death.
0045067	name:Name:positive extrathymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:positive extrathymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:positive extrathymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:positive extrathymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:positive extrathymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of sparing extrathymically maturing T cells which react with self-MHC protein complexes with low affinity levels from apoptotic death.
0043383	name:Name:negative T cell selection	name:Synonym:negative T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:negative T-cell selection	name:Synonym:negative T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of elimination of immature T cells which react strongly with self-antigens.
0045060	name:Name:negative thymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:negative thymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:negative thymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:negative thymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of elimination of immature T cells in the thymus which react strongly with self-antigens.
0045068	name:Name:negative extrathymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:negative extrathymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:negative extrathymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:negative extrathymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of elimination of extrathymically maturing T cells which react strongly with self-antigens.
0045061	name:Name:thymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:thymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:thymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:thymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of T cell selection that occurs in the thymus.
0045062	name:Name:extrathymic T cell selection	name:Synonym:extrathymic T lymphocyte selection	name:Synonym:extrathymic T-cell selection	name:Synonym:extrathymic T-lymphocyte selection	info:Definition:The process of T cell selection that occurs in extrathymic locations, often resulting T cells of distinct specificities from those selected in the thymus.
0045321	name:Name:leukocyte activation	name:Synonym:immune cell activation	name:Synonym:leucocyte activation	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of a leukocyte resulting from exposure to a specific antigen, mitogen, cytokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0002269	name:Name:leukocyte activation involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:immune cell activation during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leukocyte activation during inflammatory response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a leukocyte resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an inflammatory response.
0002270	name:Name:plasmacytoid dendritic cell activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a plasmacytoid dendritic cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0002271	name:Name:plasmacytoid dendritic cell activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:plasmacytoid dendritic cell activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a plasmacytoid dendritic cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0002273	name:Name:plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized hemopoietic precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a plasmacytoid dendritic cell.
0002274	name:Name:myeloid leukocyte activation	name:Synonym:myeloid leucocyte activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a myeloid leukocyte resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0001773	name:Name:myeloid dendritic cell activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a dendritic cell resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0002275	name:Name:myeloid cell activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:myeloid cell activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a myeloid cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0042116	name:Name:macrophage activation	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of a macrophage resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0042117	name:Name:monocyte activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a monocyte resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0042119	name:Name:neutrophil activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a neutrophil resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0043307	name:Name:eosinophil activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a eosinophil resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0045575	name:Name:basophil activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a basophil resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, soluble factor, or to (at least in mammals) an antigen which the basophil has specifically bound via IgE bound to Fc-epsilonRI receptors.
0045576	name:Name:mast cell activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a mast cell resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, soluble factor, or to (at least in mammals) an antigen which the mast cell has specifically bound via IgE bound to Fc-epsilonRI receptors.
0046649	name:Name:lymphocyte activation	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of a lymphocyte resulting from exposure to a specific antigen, mitogen, cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0002285	name:Name:lymphocyte activation involved in immune response	name:Synonym:lymphocyte activation during immune response	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of a lymphocyte resulting from exposure to a specific antigen, mitogen, cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor, leading to the initiation or perpetuation of an immune response.
0030098	name:Name:lymphocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:lymphocyte cell differentiation	name:Synonym:lymphocyte development	name:Synonym:lymphocytic blood cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized precursor cell acquires specialized features of a lymphocyte. A lymphocyte is a leukocyte commonly found in the blood and lymph that has the characteristics of a large nucleus, a neutral staining cytoplasm, and prominent heterochromatin.
0030101	name:Name:natural killer cell activation	name:Synonym:NK cell activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a natural killer cell in response to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0042110	name:Name:T cell activation	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte activation	name:Synonym:T-cell activation	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a mature or immature T cell resulting from exposure to a mitogen, cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or an antigen for which it is specific.
0042113	name:Name:B cell activation	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte activation	name:Synonym:B-cell activation	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of a mature or immature B cell resulting from exposure to a mitogen, cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or an antigen for which it is specific.
0046651	name:Name:lymphocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a lymphocyte population by cell division.
0050902	name:Name:leukocyte adhesive activation	name:Synonym:leukocyte adhesive triggering	info:Definition:The activation of loosely bound or rolling leukocytes by signals displayed on blood vessel endothelial cells, which is typically the second step in cellular extravasation.
0050900	name:Name:leukocyte migration	name:Synonym:immune cell migration	name:Synonym:immune cell trafficking	name:Synonym:leucocyte migration	name:Synonym:leucocyte trafficking	name:Synonym:leukocyte trafficking	info:Definition:The movement of a leukocyte within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
0002523	name:Name:leukocyte migration involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:immune cell migration during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:immune cell trafficking during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leucocyte migration during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leucocyte trafficking during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leukocyte migration during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leukocyte trafficking during inflammatory response	info:Definition:The movement of a leukocyte within or between different tissues and organs of the body contributing to an inflammatory response.
0002232	name:Name:leukocyte chemotaxis involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:immune cell chemotaxis during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leucocyte chemotaxis during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leukocyte chemotaxis during inflammatory response	info:Definition:The movement of an immune cell in response to an external stimulus contributing to an inflammatory response.
0030595	name:Name:leukocyte chemotaxis	name:Synonym:immune cell chemotaxis	name:Synonym:leucocyte chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a leukocyte in response to an external stimulus.
0002407	name:Name:dendritic cell chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a dendritic cell in response to an external stimulus.
0002548	name:Name:monocyte chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a monocyte in response to an external stimulus.
0002551	name:Name:mast cell chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a mast cell in response to an external stimulus.
0002575	name:Name:basophil chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a basophil in response to an external stimulus.
0030593	name:Name:neutrophil chemotaxis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a neutrophil cell, the most numerous polymorphonuclear leukocyte found in the blood, in response to an external stimulus, usually an infection or wounding.
0048245	name:Name:eosinophil chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of an eosinophil in response to an external stimulus.
0048246	name:Name:macrophage chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a macrophage in response to an external stimulus.
0048247	name:Name:lymphocyte chemotaxis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a lymphocyte in response to an external stimulus.
0071621	name:Name:granulocyte chemotaxis	info:Definition:The movement of a granulocyte in response to an external stimulus.
0035703	name:Name:monocyte migration into blood stream	name:Synonym:release of monocytes into circulation	info:Definition:The movement of a monocyte from the bone marrow to the blood stream.
0045123	name:Name:cellular extravasation	name:Synonym:immune cell cellular extravasation	name:Synonym:leucocyte cellular extravasation	name:Synonym:leukocyte cellular extravasation	name:Synonym:transendothelial leukocyte migration	info:Definition:The migration of a leukocyte from the blood vessels into the surrounding tissue.
0035696	name:Name:monocyte extravasation	info:Definition:The migration of a monocyte from the blood vessels into the surrounding tissue.
0072672	name:Name:neutrophil extravasation	info:Definition:The migration of a neutrophil from the blood vessels into the surrounding tissue.
0072682	name:Name:eosinophil extravasation	info:Definition:The migration of an eosinophil from the blood vessels into the surrounding tissue.
0072683	name:Name:T cell extravasation	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte extravasation	name:Synonym:T-cell extravasation	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte extravasation	info:Definition:The migration of a T cell from the blood vessels into the surrounding tissue.
0050904	name:Name:diapedesis	info:Definition:The passage of a leukocyte between the tight junctions of endothelial cells lining blood vessels, typically the fourth and final step of cellular extravasation.
0035685	name:Name:helper T cell diapedesis	name:Synonym:helper T-cell diapedesis	name:Synonym:T-helper cell diapedesis	info:Definition:The passage of a helper T cell between the tight junctions of endothelial cells lining blood vessels, typically the fourth and final step of cellular extravasation.
0071674	name:Name:mononuclear cell migration	info:Definition:The movement of a mononuclear cell within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
0072676	name:Name:lymphocyte migration	info:Definition:The movement of a lymphocyte within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
0072678	name:Name:T cell migration	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte migration	name:Synonym:T-cell migration	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte migration	info:Definition:The movement of a T cell within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
0097021	name:Name:lymphocyte migration into lymphoid organs	name:Synonym:lymphocyte homing	info:Definition:The movement of a lymphocyte within the lymphatic system into lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes, spleen or Peyer's patches, and its subsequent positioning within defined functional compartments such as sites of cell activation by antigen.
0072677	name:Name:eosinophil migration	info:Definition:The movement of an eosinophil within or between different tissues and organs of the body.
0006791	name:Name:sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:sulphur utilization	info:Definition:A series of processes that forms an integrated mechanism by which a cell or an organism detects the depletion of primary sulfur sources and then activates genes to scavenge the last traces of the primary sulfur source and to transport and metabolize alternate sulfur sources. The utilization process begins when the cell or organism detects sulfur levels, includes the activation of genes whose products detect, transport or metabolize sulfur-containing compounds, and ends when the sulfur is incorporated into the cell or organism's metabolism.
0006794	name:Name:phosphorus utilization	info:Definition:A series of processes that forms an integrated mechanism by which a cell or an organism detects the depletion of primary phosphorus source and then activates genes to scavenge the last traces of the primary phosphorus source and to transport and metabolize alternative phosphorus sources. The utilization process begins when the cell or organism detects phosphorus levels, includes the phosphorus-containing substances, and ends when phosphorus is incorporated into the cell or organism's metabolism.
0008152	name:Name:metabolic process	name:Synonym:metabolic process resulting in cell growth	name:Synonym:metabolism	name:Synonym:metabolism resulting in cell growth	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways, including anabolism and catabolism, by which living organisms transform chemical substances. Metabolic processes typically transform small molecules, but also include macromolecular processes such as DNA repair and replication, and protein synthesis and degradation.
0006807	name:Name:nitrogen compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organic or inorganic compounds that contain nitrogen, including (but not limited to) nitrogen fixation, nitrification, denitrification, assimilatory/dissimilatory nitrate reduction and the interconversion of nitrogenous organic matter and ammonium.
0006667	name:Name:sphinganine metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine metabolism	name:Synonym:sphinganine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sphinganine, D-erythro-2-amino-1,3-octadecanediol.
0046511	name:Name:sphinganine biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine biosynthesis	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:sphinganine anabolism	name:Synonym:sphinganine biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sphinganine formation	name:Synonym:sphinganine synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of sphinganine, D-erythro-2-amino-1,3-octadecanediol.
0009308	name:Name:amine metabolic process	name:Synonym:amine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any organic compound that is weakly basic in character and contains an amino or a substituted amino group, as carried out by individual cells. Amines are called primary, secondary, or tertiary according to whether one, two, or three carbon atoms are attached to the nitrogen atom.
0000255	name:Name:allantoin metabolic process	name:Synonym:allantoin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving allantoin, (2,5-dioxo-4-imidazolidinyl)urea, an intermediate or end product of purine catabolism.
0006022	name:Name:aminoglycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:aminoglycan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aminoglycans, any polymer containing amino groups that consists of more than about 10 monosaccharide residues joined to each other by glycosidic linkages.
0006666	name:Name:3-keto-sphinganine metabolic process	name:Synonym:3-keto-dihydrosphingosine metabolic process	name:Synonym:3-keto-dihydrosphingosine metabolism	name:Synonym:3-keto-sphinganine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 3-keto-sphinganine, a derivative of sphinganine with a ketone group at C3. It is an intermediate in the synthesis of sphingosine.
0006670	name:Name:sphingosine metabolic process	name:Synonym:(4E)-sphing-4-enine metabolic process	name:Synonym:(4E)-sphing-4-enine metabolism	name:Synonym:sphing-4-enine metabolic process	name:Synonym:sphing-4-enine metabolism	name:Synonym:sphingosine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sphingosine (sphing-4-enine), trans-D-erytho-2-amino-octadec-4-ene-1,3-diol, a long chain amino diol sphingoid base that occurs in most sphingolipids in animal tissues.
0009309	name:Name:amine biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:amine anabolism	name:Synonym:amine biosynthesis	name:Synonym:amine formation	name:Synonym:amine synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any organic compound that is weakly basic in character and contains an amino or a substituted amino group. Amines are called primary, secondary, or tertiary according to whether one, two, or three carbon atoms are attached to the nitrogen atom.
0009310	name:Name:amine catabolic process	name:Synonym:amine breakdown	name:Synonym:amine catabolism	name:Synonym:amine degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any organic compound that is weakly basic in character and contains an amino or a substituted amino group. Amines are called primary, secondary, or tertiary according to whether one, two, or three carbon atoms are attached to the nitrogen atom.
0009690	name:Name:cytokinin metabolic process	name:Synonym:cytokinin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cytokinins, a class of adenine-derived compounds that can function in plants as growth regulators.
0018868	name:Name:2-aminobenzenesulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-aminobenzenesulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:2-aminobenzenesulphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-aminobenzenesulphonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2-aminobenzenesulfonate, aniline-o-sulfonic acid, an aromatic sulfonate used in organic synthesis and in the manufacture of various dyes and medicines.
0030416	name:Name:methylamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:methylamine metabolism	name:Synonym:methylammonium metabolic process	name:Synonym:methylammonium metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methylamine (CH3NH2), a flammable, explosive gas, used in tanning and in organic synthesis and produced naturally in some decaying fish, certain plants, and crude methanol.
0030647	name:Name:aminoglycoside antibiotic metabolic process	name:Synonym:aminoglycoside antibiotic metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an aminoglycoside antibiotic, any member of a group of broad spectrum antibiotics, of similar toxicity and pharmacology, that contain an aminodeoxysugar, an amino- or guanidino-substituted inositol ring, and one or more residues of other sugars. The group includes streptomycin, neomycin, framycetin, kanamycin, paromomycin, and gentamicin.
0043420	name:Name:anthranilate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-aminobenzoate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-aminobenzoate metabolism	name:Synonym:anthranilate metabolism	name:Synonym:anthranilic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:anthranilic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:ortho-aminobenzoic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:ortho-aminobenzoic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving anthranilate (2-aminobenzoate).
0044106	name:Name:cellular amine metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any organic compound that is weakly basic in character and contains an amino or a substituted amino group, as carried out by individual cells. Amines are called primary, secondary, or tertiary according to whether one, two, or three carbon atoms are attached to the nitrogen atom.
0046433	name:Name:2-aminoethylphosphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-aminoethylphosphonate metabolism	name:Synonym:2-phosphonoethylamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-phosphonoethylamine metabolism	name:Synonym:ciliatine metabolic process	name:Synonym:ciliatine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2-aminoethylphosphonate, most abundant and ubiquitous of naturally occurring phosphonates. It is typically found as a conjugate of glycans, lipids, and proteins, which in turn perform essential biochemical functions in specialized lower organisms.
0046450	name:Name:dethiobiotin metabolic process	name:Synonym:desthiobiotin metabolic process	name:Synonym:desthiobiotin metabolism	name:Synonym:dethiobiotin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dethiobiotin, a derivative of biotin formed by replacing the sulfur atom by two hydrogen atoms.
0046451	name:Name:diaminopimelate metabolic process	name:Synonym:diaminopimelate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving diaminopimelate, the anion of the dicarboxylic acid 2,6-diaminoheptanedioic acid. It is an intermediate in lysine biosynthesis and as a component (as meso-diaminopimelate) of the peptidoglycan of Gram-negative bacterial cell walls.
0046499	name:Name:S-adenosylmethioninamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethioninamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving S-adenosylmethioninamine, (5-deoxy-5-adenosyl)(3-aminopropyl) methylsulfonium salt.
0009820	name:Name:alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alkaloids, nitrogen containing natural products which are not otherwise classified as peptides, nonprotein amino acids, amines, cyanogenic glycosides, glucosinolates, cofactors, phytohormones or primary metabolites (such as purine or pyrimidine bases).
0006769	name:Name:nicotinamide metabolic process	name:Synonym:niacin metabolic process	name:Synonym:niacin metabolism	name:Synonym:nicotinamide metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B3 metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B3 metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nicotinamide, pyridine-3-carboxamide, the amide of nicotinic acid. It is a member of the B complex of vitamins and occurs widely in living organisms.
0009821	name:Name:alkaloid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:alkaloid anabolism	name:Synonym:alkaloid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:alkaloid formation	name:Synonym:alkaloid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of alkaloids, nitrogen-containing natural products which are not otherwise classified as nonprotein amino acids, amines, peptides, amines, cyanogenic glycosides, glucosinolates, cofactors, phytohormones, or primary metabolite (such as purine or pyrimidine bases).
0009822	name:Name:alkaloid catabolic process	name:Synonym:alkaloid breakdown	name:Synonym:alkaloid catabolism	name:Synonym:alkaloid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of alkaloids, nitrogen containing natural products not otherwise classified as peptides, nonprotein amino acids, amines, cyanogenic glycosides, glucosinolates, cofactors, phytohormones or primary metabolites (such as purine or pyrimidine bases).
0018933	name:Name:nicotine metabolic process	name:Synonym:nicotine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nicotine, (S)(-)-3-(1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)pyridine.
0033076	name:Name:isoquinoline alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:ipecac alkaloid metabolism	name:Synonym:isoquinoline alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving isoquinoline alkaloids, alkaloid compounds that contain bicyclic N-containing aromatic rings and are derived from a 3,4-dihydroxytyramine (dopamine) precursor that undergoes a Schiff base addition with aldehydes of different origin.
0035834	name:Name:indole alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an indole alkaloid, an alkaloid containing an indole skeleton.
0042616	name:Name:paclitaxel metabolic process	name:Synonym:paclitaxel metabolism	name:Synonym:taxol metabolic process	name:Synonym:taxol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving paclitaxel, an alkaloid compound used as an anticancer treatment.
0046446	name:Name:purine alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:purine alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving purine alkaloids, compounds derived from purine and composed of an N-containing double ring structure.
0046448	name:Name:tropane alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:tropane alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tropane alkaloids, compounds containing the 8-methyl-8-azabicyclo(3.2.1)octane ring system.
0046453	name:Name:dipyrrin metabolic process	name:Synonym:dipyrrin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dipyrrins (pyrromethanes), compounds containing two pyrrole rings linked through a methine, -CH=, group.
0050813	name:Name:epothilone metabolic process	name:Synonym:epothilone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving epothilone, a drug obtained from the myxobacteria Sporangium cellulosum that interferes with cell division. Some epothilones are being studied as treatments for cancer.
0010135	name:Name:ureide metabolic process	name:Synonym:ureide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ureide, allantoin and allantoate, which are the organic forms of nitrogen in nitrogen fixing and transporting plants.
0010136	name:Name:ureide catabolic process	name:Synonym:ureide breakdown	name:Synonym:ureide catabolism	name:Synonym:ureide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ureide, which is the organic form of nitrogen in nitrogen fixing and transporting plants with the release of ammonium.
0010137	name:Name:ureide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ureide anabolism	name:Synonym:ureide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ureide formation	name:Synonym:ureide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ureide, the organic form of nitrogen in nitrogen fixing and transporting plants, from IMP, which is synthesized de novo during nitrogen fixation by roots.
0018884	name:Name:carbazole metabolic process	name:Synonym:CAR metabolic process	name:Synonym:CAR metabolism	name:Synonym:carbazole metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbazole, a heterocyclic aromatic compound containing a dibenzopyrrole system that is produced during coal gasification and is present in cigarette smoke. Coal tar produced at high temperature contains an average of 1.5% carbazole. It is used widely in synthesis of dyes, pharmaceuticals, and plastics and is a suspected carcinogen.
0046232	name:Name:carbazole catabolic process	name:Synonym:carbazole breakdown	name:Synonym:carbazole catabolism	name:Synonym:carbazole degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of carbazole, a heterocyclic aromatic compound containing a dibenzopyrrole system that is produced during coal gasification and is present in cigarette smoke. Coal tar produced at high temperature contains an average of 1.5% carbazole. It is used widely in synthesis of dyes, pharmaceuticals, and plastics and is a suspected carcinogen.
0018887	name:Name:4-carboxy-4'-sulfoazobenzene metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-carboxy-4'-sulfoazobenzene metabolism	name:Synonym:4-carboxy-4'-sulphoazobenzene metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-carboxy-4'-sulphoazobenzene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 4-carboxy-4'-sulfoazobenzene, a sulfonated azo compound synthesized by nitro-amine condensation from sulfanilic acid and 4-nitrobenzoic acid.
0018916	name:Name:nitrobenzene metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrobenzene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrobenzene (nitrobenzol), a derivative of benzene with an NO2 group attached to the ring. It is a yellow aromatic liquid used in perfumery and manufactured in large quantities in the preparation of aniline.
0018934	name:Name:nitrilotriacetate metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrilotriacetate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrilotriacetate, an aminotricarboxylic acid that binds bivalent metal ions in a ratio of 1:1. As an important industrial chelating agent, NTA has been widely used for various radionuclide processing and decontamination procedures, such as textile, paper and pulp processing and water treatment.
0018935	name:Name:aerobic nitrilotriacetate metabolic process	name:Synonym:aerobic nitrilotriacetate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrilotriacetate, the aminotricarboxylic acid N(CH2COO-)3, that occur in the presence of oxygen.
0018936	name:Name:anaerobic nitrilotriacetate metabolic process	name:Synonym:anaerobic nitrilotriacetate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrilotriacetate, the aminotricarboxylic acid N(CH2COO-)3, that occur in the absence of oxygen.
0018937	name:Name:nitroglycerin metabolic process	name:Synonym:NG metabolic process	name:Synonym:NG metabolism	name:Synonym:nitroglycerin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitroglycerin, a well-known nitrate ester and an important component of dynamite and other propellants. Toxic to algae, invertebrate, and vertebrates.
0018954	name:Name:pentaerythritol tetranitrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:pentaerythritol tetranitrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pentaerythritol tetranitrate, C(CH2-O-NO2)4, a substance produced for use as an explosive and a vasodilator.
0018965	name:Name:s-triazine compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:s-triazine compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any s-triazine compound. These compounds include many pesticides of widespread use in agriculture, and are characterized by a symmetrical hexameric ring consisting of alternating carbon and nitrogen atoms.
0018873	name:Name:atrazine metabolic process	name:Synonym:atrazine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving atrazine, a triazine ring-containing compound, widely used as a herbicide.
0042199	name:Name:cyanuric acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanuric acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyanuric acid, a suspected gastrointestinal or liver toxicant, and a potential degradation product of triazine herbicides, such as atrazine and simazine. It is widely used for the stabilization of available chlorine in swimming pool water and is also the starting compound for the synthesis of many organic derivatives.
0042201	name:Name:N-cyclopropylmelamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyromazine metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyromazine metabolism	name:Synonym:N-cyclopropylmelamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving N-cyclopropylmelamine, a triazine compound commonly used as an insect growth regulator insecticide.
0042204	name:Name:s-triazine compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:s-triazine compound breakdown	name:Synonym:s-triazine compound catabolism	name:Synonym:s-triazine compound degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any s-triazine compound. These compounds include many pesticides of widespread use in agriculture, and are characterized by a symmetrical hexameric ring consisting of alternating carbon and nitrogen atoms.
0019329	name:Name:ammonia oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which ammonia or ammonium is converted to molecular nitrogen or another nitrogen compound, with accompanying loss of electrons.
0019331	name:Name:anaerobic respiration, using ammonium as electron donor	name:Synonym:anaerobic ammonium oxidation	name:Synonym:anammox	info:Definition:The oxidation of ammonium (NH4) to nitrogen (N2) in the absence of oxygen, using nitrite (NO2) as the electron acceptor. It is suggested that hydroxylamine and ammonium are combined to yield hydrazine, which is subsequently oxidized to N2.
0019409	name:Name:aerobic respiration, using ammonia as electron donor	name:Synonym:aerobic ammonia oxidation to nitrite via hydrazine	info:Definition:The metabolic process in which ammonia (NH3) is oxidized to nitrite (NO2) in the presence of oxygen; enzymatic reactions convert ammonia to hydrazine, and hydrazine to nitrite.
0070275	name:Name:aerobic ammonia oxidation to nitrite via pyruvic oxime	info:Definition:The metabolic process in which ammonia (NH3) is oxidized to nitrite (NO2) in the presence of oxygen. Hydroxylamine is produced enzymatically, and, in the presence of pyruvate, forms pyruvic oxime in a spontaneous, non-enzymatic reaction; pyruvic oxime is then converted to nitrite.
0019330	name:Name:aldoxime metabolic process	name:Synonym:aldoxime metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aldoximes, compounds derived by the reaction of an aldose with hydroxylamine, thus containing the aldoxime group -HC=NOH.
0018983	name:Name:Z-phenylacetaldoxime metabolic process	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving Z-phenylacetaldoxime, a member of the glucosinolate group of compounds, a class of natural products that are gaining increasing interest as cancer-preventing agents and crop protectants.
0033013	name:Name:tetrapyrrole metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrapyrroles, natural pigments containing four pyrrole rings joined by one-carbon units linking position 2 of one pyrrole ring to position 5 of the next.
0006778	name:Name:porphyrin metabolic process	name:Synonym:porphyrin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any member of a large group of derivatives or analogs of porphyrin. Porphyrins consists of a ring of four pyrrole nuclei linked each to the next at their alpha positions through a methine group.
0015009	name:Name:corrin metabolic process	name:Synonym:corrin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving corrin, C19H22N4, the fundamental heterocyclic skeleton of the corrinoids. It consists of four reduced pyrrole rings joined into a macrocyclic ring. Corrin is the core of the vitamin B12 molecule.
0015010	name:Name:tetrahydrocorphin metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrahydrocorphin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrahydrocorphins, tetrapyrroles that combine the structural elements of both porphyrins and corrins.
0033014	name:Name:tetrapyrrole biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole anabolism	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole biosynthesis	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole formation	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways leading to the formation of tetrapyrroles, natural pigments containing four pyrrole rings joined by one-carbon units linking position 2 of one pyrrole ring to position 5 of the next.
0033015	name:Name:tetrapyrrole catabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole breakdown	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole catabolism	name:Synonym:tetrapyrrole degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways leading to the breakdown of tetrapyrroles, natural pigments containing four pyrrole rings joined by one-carbon units linking position 2 of one pyrrole ring to position 5 of the next.
0051202	name:Name:phytochromobilin metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytochromobilin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytochromobilin, the linear tetrapyrrole chromophore required for plant phytochrome photoactivity.
0034641	name:Name:cellular nitrogen compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular nitrogen compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving various organic and inorganic nitrogenous compounds, as carried out by individual cells.
0006139	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism	info:Definition:Any cellular metabolic process involving nucleobases, nucleosides, nucleotides and nucleic acids.
0006577	name:Name:betaine metabolic process	name:Synonym:betaine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any betaine, the N-trimethyl derivative of an amino acid.
0009439	name:Name:cyanate metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyanate, NCO-, the anion of cyanic acid.
0018865	name:Name:acrylonitrile metabolic process	name:Synonym:acrylonitrile metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acrylonitrile, a colorless, volatile liquid with a pungent odor. Acrylonitrile is used in the production of acrylic fibers, plastics, and synthetic rubbers.
0018876	name:Name:benzonitrile metabolic process	name:Synonym:benzonitrile metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving benzonitrile. Benzonitrile is used as a solvent and chemical intermediate in the pharmaceutical, dyestuffs and rubber industries. It is highly toxic and harmful in contact with skin.
0018938	name:Name:2-nitropropane metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-nitropropane metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2-nitropropane, a clear, colorless liquid with a mild, fruity odor. 2-nitropropane is used principally as a solvent and chemical intermediate. As a solvent, it is used in inks, paints, adhesives, varnishes, polymers, and synthetic materials. It is a feedstock for the manufacture of 2-nitro-2-methyl-1-propanol and 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol.
0019332	name:Name:aerobic respiration, using nitrite as electron donor	name:Synonym:nitrite oxidation	info:Definition:The oxidation of nitrite (NO2) to nitrate (NO3), using oxygen (O2) as the electron acceptor. Nitrite oxidation is the final step in nitrification, the oxidation of ammonia to nitrate, and nitrite oxidoreductase (NOR) is the key enzyme complex that catalyzes the conversion of nitrite to nitrate in nitrite oxidizing species.
0019499	name:Name:cyanide metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyanide, NC-, the anion of hydrocyanic acid. Cyanide is a potent inhibitor of respiration, reacting with the ferric form of cytochrome aa3 and thus blocking the electron transport chain.
0042430	name:Name:indole-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:indole derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:indole-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:ketole metabolic process	name:Synonym:ketole metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving compounds that contain an indole (2,3-benzopyrrole) skeleton.
0042726	name:Name:flavin-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:flavin-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:riboflavin and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:riboflavin and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B2 and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B2 and derivative metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a flavin, any derivative of the dimethylisoalloxazine (7,8-dimethylbenzo[g]pteridine-2,4(3H,10H)-dione) skeleton, with a substituent on the 10 position.
0043603	name:Name:cellular amide metabolic process	name:Synonym:amide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an amide, any derivative of an oxoacid in which an acidic hydroxy group has been replaced by an amino or substituted amino group, as carried out by individual cells.
0044270	name:Name:cellular nitrogen compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound breakdown	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound catabolism	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of organic and inorganic nitrogenous compounds.
0044271	name:Name:cellular nitrogen compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound anabolism	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound formation	name:Synonym:nitrogen compound synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of organic and inorganic nitrogenous compounds.
0046415	name:Name:urate metabolic process	name:Synonym:urate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving urate, the anion of uric acid, 2,6,8-trioxypurine, the end product of purine metabolism in certain mammals and the main excretory product in uricotelic animals.
0070408	name:Name:carbamoyl phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:carbamoyl phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbamoyl phosphate, an intermediate in the urea cycle and other nitrogen compound metabolic pathways.
0070458	name:Name:cellular detoxification of nitrogen compound	name:Synonym:cellular detoxification of nitrogenous compound	info:Definition:Any cellular process that reduces or removes the toxicity of nitrogenous compounds which are dangerous or toxic. This includes the aerobic conversion of toxic compounds to harmless substances.
0072521	name:Name:purine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:purine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:purine-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a purine-containing compound, i.e. any compound that contains purine or a formal derivative thereof.
0072524	name:Name:pyridine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyridine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyridine-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a pyridine-containing compound, i.e. any compound that contains pyridine or a formal derivative thereof.
0072527	name:Name:pyrimidine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyrimidine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyrimidine-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a pyrimidine-containing compound, i.e. any compound that contains pyrimidine or a formal derivative thereof.
0042126	name:Name:nitrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrates, inorganic or organic salts and esters of nitric acid.
0042128	name:Name:nitrate assimilation	name:Synonym:assimilatory nitrate reduction	info:Definition:The nitrogen metabolic process that encompasses the uptake of nitrate from the environment and reduction to ammonia, and results in the incorporation of nitrogen derived from nitrate into cellular substances.
0043602	name:Name:nitrate catabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrate disassimilation	name:Synonym:nitrate dissimilation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of nitrates, inorganic or organic salts and esters of nitric acid.
0042399	name:Name:ectoine metabolic process	name:Synonym:ectoine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ectoine (1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinecarboxylic acid), a tetrahydropyrimidine commonly synthesized by halophilic bacteria.
0019491	name:Name:ectoine biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ectoine anabolism	name:Synonym:ectoine biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ectoine formation	name:Synonym:ectoine synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ectoine (1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinecarboxylic acid), a tetrahydropyrimidine commonly synthesized by halophilic bacteria.
0042400	name:Name:ectoine catabolic process	name:Synonym:ectoine breakdown	name:Synonym:ectoine catabolism	name:Synonym:ectoine degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ectoine (1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinecarboxylic acid), a tetrahydropyrimidine commonly synthesized by halophilic bacteria.
0042558	name:Name:pteridine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:pterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:pterin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any compound containing pteridine (pyrazino(2,3-dipyrimidine)), e.g. pteroic acid, xanthopterin and folic acid.
0006760	name:Name:folic acid-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:folate and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:folate and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:folate-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:folate-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:folic acid and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:folic acid and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:folic acid-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B9 and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B9 and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin M and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin M and derivative metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a folic acid-containing compound, i.e. any of a group of heterocyclic compounds based on the pteroic acid skeleton conjugated with one or more L-glutamic acid or L-glutamate units.
0019889	name:Name:pteridine metabolic process	name:Synonym:pteridine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pteridine, pyrazino(2,3-dipyrimidine), the parent structure of pterins and the pteroyl group.
0042559	name:Name:pteridine-containing compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound anabolism	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound formation	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound synthesis	name:Synonym:pterin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pterin biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any compound containing pteridine (pyrazino(2,3-dipyrimidine)), e.g. pteroic acid, xanthopterin and folic acid.
0042560	name:Name:pteridine-containing compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative catabolic process	name:Synonym:pteridine and derivative catabolism	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound breakdown	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound catabolism	name:Synonym:pteridine-containing compound degradation	name:Synonym:pterin catabolic process	name:Synonym:pterin catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any compound containing pteridine (pyrazino(2,3-dipyrimidine)), e.g. pteroic acid, xanthopterin and folic acid.
0043545	name:Name:molybdopterin cofactor metabolic process	name:Synonym:Moco metabolic process	name:Synonym:Moco metabolism	name:Synonym:molybdopterin cofactor metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving the molybdopterin cofactor (Moco), essential for the catalytic activity of some enzymes, e.g. sulfite oxidase, xanthine dehydrogenase, and aldehyde oxidase. The cofactor consists of a mononuclear molybdenum (Mo-molybdopterin) or tungsten ion (W-molybdopterin) coordinated by one or two molybdopterin ligands.
0046146	name:Name:tetrahydrobiopterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrahydrobiopterin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrahydrobiopterin, the reduced form of biopterin (2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-(1,2-dihydroxypropyl)-pteridine). It functions as a hydroxylation coenzyme, e.g. in the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine.
0051066	name:Name:dihydrobiopterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:6,7-dihydrobiopterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:7,8-dihydrobiopterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrobiopterin reduction	name:Synonym:dihydropterin metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydropterin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a dihydrobiopterin, a reduced pteridine derivative related to folic acid; it acts as an electron carrier in tyrosine biosynthesis and its quinoid form is produced by oxidation of tetrahydrobiopterin in several biological hydroxylation reactions.
0051067	name:Name:dihydropteridine metabolic process	name:Synonym:6,7-dihydropteridine metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydropteridine metabolism	name:Synonym:dihydropteridine reduction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 6,7-dihydropteridine, a bicyclic compound with the formula C6H6N4.
0042723	name:Name:thiamine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamin-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving thiamine (vitamin B1), and compounds derived from it.
0006772	name:Name:thiamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving thiamine (vitamin B1), a water soluble vitamin present in fresh vegetables and meats, especially liver.
0042357	name:Name:thiamine diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamin pyrophosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin pyrophosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine pyrophosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamine pyrophosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:TPP metabolic process	name:Synonym:TPP metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving thiamine diphosphate, a derivative of thiamine (vitamin B1) which acts as a coenzyme in a range of processes including the Krebs cycle.
0042724	name:Name:thiamine-containing compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thiamin-containing compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound anabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound formation	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound synthesis	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative biosynthesis	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of thiamine (vitamin B1), and related compounds.
0042725	name:Name:thiamine-containing compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative catabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamin and derivative catabolism	name:Synonym:thiamin-containing compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative catabolic process	name:Synonym:thiamine and derivative catabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound breakdown	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound catabolism	name:Synonym:thiamine-containing compound degradation	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative catabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 and derivative catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of thiamine (vitamin B1), and compounds derived from it.
0046209	name:Name:nitric oxide metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitric oxide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide (NO), a colorless gas only slightly soluble in water.
0006809	name:Name:nitric oxide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nitric oxide anabolism	name:Synonym:nitric oxide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nitric oxide formation	name:Synonym:nitric oxide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide (NO), a colorless gas only slightly soluble in water.
0046210	name:Name:nitric oxide catabolic process	name:Synonym:nitric oxide breakdown	name:Synonym:nitric oxide catabolism	name:Synonym:nitric oxide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide (NO), a colorless gas only slightly soluble in water.
0050898	name:Name:nitrile metabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrile metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nitriles, an organic compound containing trivalent nitrogen attached to one carbon atom. The nitriles are named with reference to the acids produced by their decomposition; for example, hydrocyanic acid is formic nitrile, and methyl cyanide is acetic nitrile.
0018881	name:Name:bromoxynil metabolic process	name:Synonym:bromoxynil metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving bromoxynil, C7H3Br2NO, a dibrominated phenol derivative with a cyano (-CN) group attached. Bromoxynil is used as a herbicide for post-emergent control of annual broadleaf weeds and works by inhibiting photosynthesis in the target plants.
0018890	name:Name:cyanamide metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanamide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyanamide, NCNH2, a cyanide compound which has been used as a fertilizer, defoliant and in many manufacturing processes. It often occurs as the calcium salt, sometimes also referred to as cyanamide. The citrated calcium salt is used in the treatment of alcoholism.
0050899	name:Name:nitrile catabolic process	name:Synonym:nitrile breakdown	name:Synonym:nitrile catabolism	name:Synonym:nitrile degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a nitrile, an organic compound containing trivalent nitrogen attached to one carbon atom.
0080028	name:Name:nitrile biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a nitrile, an organic compound containing trivalent nitrogen attached to one carbon atom.
0051410	name:Name:detoxification of nitrogen compound	name:Synonym:detoxification of nitrogenous compound	name:Synonym:nitric oxide (NO) detoxification	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of nitrogenous compounds which are dangerous or toxic. This includes the aerobic conversion of toxic compounds to harmless substances.
0071941	name:Name:nitrogen cycle metabolic process	info:Definition:A nitrogen compound metabolic process that contributes to the nitrogen cycle. The nitrogen cycle is a series of metabolic pathways by which nitrogen is converted between various forms and redox states; it encompasses pathways in which nitrogen is acted upon directly, such as nitrification, denitrification, nitrogen fixation, and mineralization.
0009399	name:Name:nitrogen fixation	info:Definition:The process in which nitrogen is taken from its relatively inert molecular form (N2) in the atmosphere and converted into nitrogen compounds useful for other chemical processes, such as ammonia, nitrate and nitrogen dioxide.
0019333	name:Name:denitrification pathway	info:Definition:The reduction of nitrate to dinitrogen by four reactions; each intermediate is transformed to the next lower oxidation state; also part of cellular bioenergetics; the nitrogen compounds can serve as terminal acceptors for electron transport phosphorylation in place of oxygen.
0019627	name:Name:urea metabolic process	name:Synonym:urea metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving urea, the water soluble compound O=C-(NH2)2.
0009056	name:Name:catabolic process	name:Synonym:breakdown	name:Synonym:catabolism	name:Synonym:degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of substances, including the breakdown of carbon compounds with the liberation of energy for use by the cell or organism.
0009057	name:Name:macromolecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:biopolymer catabolic process	name:Synonym:macromolecule breakdown	name:Synonym:macromolecule catabolism	name:Synonym:macromolecule degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a macromolecule, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass.
0000272	name:Name:polysaccharide catabolic process	name:Synonym:polysaccharide breakdown	name:Synonym:polysaccharide catabolism	name:Synonym:polysaccharide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of polysaccharides, polymers of more than 10 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages.
0006516	name:Name:glycoprotein catabolic process	name:Synonym:glycoprotein breakdown	name:Synonym:glycoprotein catabolism	name:Synonym:glycoprotein degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycoproteins, any protein that contains covalently bound glycose (i.e. monosaccharide) residues; the glycose occurs most commonly as oligosaccharide or fairly small polysaccharide but occasionally as monosaccharide.
0030163	name:Name:protein catabolic process	name:Synonym:pheromone catabolic process	name:Synonym:pheromone catabolism	name:Synonym:protein breakdown	name:Synonym:protein catabolism	name:Synonym:protein degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a protein by the destruction of the native, active configuration, with or without the hydrolysis of peptide bonds.
0030167	name:Name:proteoglycan catabolic process	name:Synonym:proteoglycan breakdown	name:Synonym:proteoglycan catabolism	name:Synonym:proteoglycan degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of proteoglycans, any glycoprotein in which the carbohydrate units are glycosaminoglycans.
0032801	name:Name:receptor catabolic process	name:Synonym:receptor breakdown	name:Synonym:receptor catabolism	name:Synonym:receptor degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a receptor molecule, a macromolecule that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
0042540	name:Name:hemoglobin catabolic process	name:Synonym:haemoglobin catabolic process	name:Synonym:haemoglobin catabolism	name:Synonym:haemoglobin hydrolysis	name:Synonym:hemoglobin breakdown	name:Synonym:hemoglobin catabolism	name:Synonym:hemoglobin degradation	name:Synonym:hemoglobin hydrolysis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of hemoglobin, an oxygen carrying, conjugated protein containing four heme groups and globin; especially, the proteolytic cleavage of hemoglobin to yield free heme, peptides, and amino acids.
0044265	name:Name:cellular macromolecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular biopolymer catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a macromolecule, any large molecule including proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates, as carried out by individual cells.
0044266	name:Name:multicellular organismal macromolecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal macromolecule breakdown	name:Synonym:organismal macromolecule catabolism	name:Synonym:organismal macromolecule degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a macromolecule, any large molecule including proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates, in multicellular organisms occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0052361	name:Name:catabolism by organism of macromolecule in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:catabolism by organism of macromolecule in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism resulting in the breakdown of macromolecules within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0016042	name:Name:lipid catabolic process	name:Synonym:lipid breakdown	name:Synonym:lipid catabolism	name:Synonym:lipid degradation	name:Synonym:lipolysis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of lipids, compounds soluble in an organic solvent but not, or sparingly, in an aqueous solvent.
0006706	name:Name:steroid catabolic process	name:Synonym:steroid breakdown	name:Synonym:steroid catabolism	name:Synonym:steroid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of steroids, compounds with a 1,2,cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nucleus.
0044240	name:Name:multicellular organismal lipid catabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal lipid breakdown	name:Synonym:organismal lipid catabolism	name:Synonym:organismal lipid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of lipids, occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level of a multicellular organism.
0044242	name:Name:cellular lipid catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular lipid breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular lipid catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular lipid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of lipids, as carried out by individual cells.
0016052	name:Name:carbohydrate catabolic process	name:Synonym:carbohydrate breakdown	name:Synonym:carbohydrate catabolism	name:Synonym:carbohydrate degradation	name:Synonym:catabolic carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:catabolic carbohydrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0006064	name:Name:glucuronate catabolic process	name:Synonym:glucuronate breakdown	name:Synonym:glucuronate catabolism	name:Synonym:glucuronate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glucuronate, any salt or ester of glucuronic acid.
0009313	name:Name:oligosaccharide catabolic process	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide breakdown	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide catabolism	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
0019579	name:Name:aldaric acid catabolic process	name:Synonym:aldaric acid breakdown	name:Synonym:aldaric acid catabolism	name:Synonym:aldaric acid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of aldaric acid, any dicarboxylic acid formed by oxidation of by the terminal groups of an aldose to carboxyl group.
0019584	name:Name:galactonate catabolic process	name:Synonym:galactonate breakdown	name:Synonym:galactonate catabolism	name:Synonym:galactonate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of galactonate, the anion of galactonic acid.
0044041	name:Name:multi-organism carbohydrate catabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism carbohydrate breakdown	name:Synonym:multi-organism carbohydrate catabolism	name:Synonym:multi-organism carbohydrate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, involving more than one organism.
0044275	name:Name:cellular carbohydrate catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular carbohydrate breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular carbohydrate catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular carbohydrate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, as carried out by individual cells.
0044276	name:Name:multicellular organismal carbohydrate catabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal carbohydrate breakdown	name:Synonym:organismal carbohydrate catabolism	name:Synonym:organismal carbohydrate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, in multicellular organisms occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0016998	name:Name:cell wall macromolecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:cell wall breakdown	name:Synonym:cell wall catabolism	name:Synonym:cell wall degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of macromolecules that form part of a cell wall.
0006039	name:Name:cell wall chitin catabolic process	name:Synonym:cell wall chitin breakdown	name:Synonym:cell wall chitin catabolism	name:Synonym:cell wall chitin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of cell wall chitin, a linear polysaccharide consisting of P-1,4-linked N-acetyl-D-glucosamine residues, found in the walls of cells.
0044039	name:Name:cellular cell wall macromolecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall macromolecule breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall macromolecule catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall macromolecule degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of macromolecules forming part of a cell wall, occurring at the level of the cell.
0044347	name:Name:cell wall polysaccharide catabolic process	name:Synonym:cell wall polysaccharide breakdown	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of cell wall polysaccharides.
0070910	name:Name:cell wall macromolecule catabolic process involved in cell wall disassembly	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways that result in the breakdown of macromolecules that form part of a cell wall, and contributes to the breakdown of the cell wall.
0042447	name:Name:hormone catabolic process	name:Synonym:hormone breakdown	name:Synonym:hormone catabolism	name:Synonym:hormone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any hormone, naturally occurring substances secreted by specialized cells that affects the metabolism or behavior of other cells possessing functional receptors for the hormone.
0006710	name:Name:androgen catabolic process	name:Synonym:androgen breakdown	name:Synonym:androgen catabolism	name:Synonym:androgen degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of androgens, C19 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of male sexual characteristics.
0006711	name:Name:estrogen catabolic process	name:Synonym:estrogen breakdown	name:Synonym:estrogen catabolism	name:Synonym:estrogen degradation	name:Synonym:oestrogen catabolic process	name:Synonym:oestrogen catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of estrogens, C18 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of female sexual characteristics. Also found in plants.
0006719	name:Name:juvenile hormone catabolic process	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone breakdown	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone catabolism	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of juvenile hormones, the three sesquiterpenoid derivatives that function to maintain the larval state of insects at molting and that may be required for other processes, e.g. oogenesis.
0008208	name:Name:C21-steroid hormone catabolic process	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone breakdown	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone catabolism	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of C21-steroid hormones, steroid compounds containing 21 carbons which function as hormones.
0009823	name:Name:cytokinin catabolic process	name:Synonym:cytokinin breakdown	name:Synonym:cytokinin catabolism	name:Synonym:cytokinin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of cytokinins, a class of adenine-derived compounds that can function in plants as plant growth regulators.
0009852	name:Name:auxin catabolic process	name:Synonym:auxin breakdown	name:Synonym:auxin catabolism	name:Synonym:auxin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of auxins, a group of plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0010816	name:Name:calcitonin catabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of the peptide calcitonin.
0016133	name:Name:brassinosteroid catabolic process	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid breakdown	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid catabolism	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of brassinosteroids, any of a group of steroid derivatives that occur at very low concentrations in plant tissues and may have hormone-like effects.
0042404	name:Name:thyroid hormone catabolic process	name:Synonym:thyroid hormone breakdown	name:Synonym:thyroid hormone catabolism	name:Synonym:thyroid hormone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any of the compounds secreted by the thyroid gland, largely thyroxine and triiodothyronine.
0042442	name:Name:melatonin catabolic process	name:Synonym:melatonin breakdown	name:Synonym:melatonin catabolism	name:Synonym:melatonin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine).
0042812	name:Name:pheromone catabolic process	name:Synonym:pheromone breakdown	name:Synonym:pheromone catabolism	name:Synonym:pheromone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of pheromones, a substance that is secreted and released by an organism and detected by a second organism of the same or a closely related species, in which it causes a specific reaction, such as a definite behavioral reaction or a developmental process.
0046344	name:Name:ecdysteroid catabolic process	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid breakdown	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid catabolism	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ecdysteroids, a group of polyhydroxylated ketosteroids which initiate post-embryonic development.
0044035	name:Name:multi-organism catabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism catabolism	name:Synonym:multi-organismal catabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organismal catabolism	info:Definition:Any catabolic process - chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of substances - which involves more than one organism.
0052227	name:Name:catabolism of substance in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:catabolism of substance in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism in a second organism resulting in the breakdown of substances, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044248	name:Name:cellular catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of substances, carried out by individual cells.
0006798	name:Name:polyphosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:polyphosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:polyphosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:polyphosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a polyphosphate, the anion or salt of polyphosphoric acid.
0006914	name:Name:autophagy	name:Synonym:chaperone-mediated autophagy	info:Definition:The process in which cells digest parts of their own cytoplasm; allows for both recycling of macromolecular constituents under conditions of cellular stress and remodeling the intracellular structure for cell differentiation.
0009111	name:Name:vitamin catabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin breakdown	name:Synonym:vitamin catabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a vitamin, one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0009407	name:Name:toxin catabolic process	name:Synonym:toxin breakdown	name:Synonym:toxin catabolism	name:Synonym:toxin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of toxin, a poisonous compound (typically a protein) that is produced by cells or organisms and that can cause disease when introduced into the body or tissues of an organism.
0016054	name:Name:organic acid catabolic process	name:Synonym:organic acid breakdown	name:Synonym:organic acid catabolism	name:Synonym:organic acid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of organic acids, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage.
0017001	name:Name:antibiotic catabolic process	name:Synonym:antibiotic breakdown	name:Synonym:antibiotic catabolism	name:Synonym:antibiotic degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of antibiotic, a substance produced by or derived from certain fungi, bacteria, and other organisms, that can destroy or inhibit the growth of other microorganisms.
0017181	name:Name:peptidyl-diphthine catabolic process	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine breakdown	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine catabolism	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of peptidyl-diphthine, a modified histidine residue.
0017184	name:Name:peptidyl-diphthamide catabolic process	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide breakdown	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide catabolism	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of peptidyl-diphthamide, a modified histidine residue.
0019439	name:Name:aromatic compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:aromatic compound breakdown	name:Synonym:aromatic compound catabolism	name:Synonym:aromatic compound degradation	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon catabolic process	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of aromatic compounds, any substance containing an aromatic carbon ring.
0030995	name:Name:cell septum edging catabolic process	name:Synonym:cell septum edging hydrolysis	name:Synonym:hydrolysis of cell septum edging	name:Synonym:hydrolysis of edging of cell septum	name:Synonym:septum edging hydrolysis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the dissolution of the septum edging during cell separation.
0042135	name:Name:neurotransmitter catabolic process	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter breakdown	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter catabolism	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of any of a group of substances that are released on excitation from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell.
0042178	name:Name:xenobiotic catabolic process	name:Synonym:xenobiotic breakdown	name:Synonym:xenobiotic catabolism	name:Synonym:xenobiotic degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a xenobiotic compound, a compound foreign to living organisms. Used of chemical compounds, e.g. a xenobiotic chemical, such as a pesticide.
0042182	name:Name:ketone catabolic process	name:Synonym:ketone breakdown	name:Synonym:ketone catabolism	name:Synonym:ketone degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ketones, a class of organic compounds that contain the carbonyl group, CO, and in which the carbonyl group is bonded only to carbon atoms. The general formula for a ketone is RCOR, where R and R are alkyl or aryl groups.
0042737	name:Name:drug catabolic process	name:Synonym:drug breakdown	name:Synonym:drug catabolism	name:Synonym:drug degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a drug, a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease.
0042744	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide catabolic process	name:Synonym:detoxification of H2O2	name:Synonym:detoxification of hydrogen peroxide	name:Synonym:H2O2 catabolic process	name:Synonym:H2O2 scavenging	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide breakdown	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide catabolism	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide degradation	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide removal	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide scavenging	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
0043171	name:Name:peptide catabolic process	name:Synonym:peptide breakdown	name:Synonym:peptide catabolism	name:Synonym:peptide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of peptides, compounds of 2 or more (but usually less than 100) amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another.
0043448	name:Name:alkane catabolic process	name:Synonym:alkane breakdown	name:Synonym:alkane catabolism	name:Synonym:alkane degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of an alkane, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having the general formula CnH2n+2.
0043451	name:Name:alkene catabolic process	name:Synonym:alkene breakdown	name:Synonym:alkene catabolism	name:Synonym:alkene degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of an alkene, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having one carbon-carbon double bond and the general formula CnH2n.
0043454	name:Name:alkyne catabolic process	name:Synonym:alkyne breakdown	name:Synonym:alkyne catabolism	name:Synonym:alkyne degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of an alkyne, any cyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having a carbon-carbon triple bond and the general formula CnH2n-2.
0044109	name:Name:cellular alcohol catabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom, occurring at the level of the individual cell.
0044269	name:Name:glycerol ether catabolic process	name:Synonym:glycerol ether breakdown	name:Synonym:glycerol ether catabolism	name:Synonym:glycerol ether degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycerol ethers, any anhydride formed between two organic hydroxy compounds, one of which is glycerol.
0044273	name:Name:sulfur compound catabolic process	name:Synonym:sulfur catabolic process	name:Synonym:sulfur catabolism	name:Synonym:sulfur compound breakdown	name:Synonym:sulfur compound catabolism	name:Synonym:sulfur compound degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of compounds that contain sulfur, such as the amino acids methionine and cysteine or the tripeptide glutathione.
0046185	name:Name:aldehyde catabolic process	name:Synonym:aldehyde breakdown	name:Synonym:aldehyde catabolism	name:Synonym:aldehyde degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of aldehydes, any organic compound with the formula R-CH=O.
0046413	name:Name:organomercury catabolic process	name:Synonym:organomercury breakdown	name:Synonym:organomercury catabolism	name:Synonym:organomercury degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of organomercury compounds, any organic compound containing a mercury atom.
0046700	name:Name:heterocycle catabolic process	name:Synonym:heterocycle breakdown	name:Synonym:heterocycle catabolism	name:Synonym:heterocycle degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of heterocyclic compounds, those with a cyclic molecular structure and at least two different atoms in the ring (or rings).
0046952	name:Name:ketone body catabolic process	name:Synonym:ketone body breakdown	name:Synonym:ketone body catabolism	name:Synonym:ketone body degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ketone bodies, any one of the three substances: acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate) or acetone. Ketone bodies can be used as an energy source as an alternative to glucose. Utilization of ketone bodies in peripheral tissues involves conversion of acetoacetate to acetoacetyl-CoA, which is then converted to two molecules of acetyl-CoA.
0051187	name:Name:cofactor catabolic process	name:Synonym:cofactor breakdown	name:Synonym:cofactor catabolism	name:Synonym:cofactor degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cofactor, a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein.
0052316	name:Name:phytoalexin catabolic process	name:Synonym:phytoalexin catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of phytoalexins, any of a range of substances produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0044282	name:Name:small molecule catabolic process	name:Synonym:small molecule catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of small molecules, any monomeric molecule of small relative molecular mass.
0002150	name:Name:hypochlorous acid catabolic process	name:Synonym:HClO catabolic process	name:Synonym:HOCl catabolic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorite catabolic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorous acid catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of hypochlorous acid.
0019628	name:Name:urate catabolic process	name:Synonym:urate breakdown	name:Synonym:urate catabolism	name:Synonym:urate degradation	name:Synonym:uric acid catabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of urate, the anion of uric acid, 2,6,8-trioxypurine.
0034656	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide catabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide breakdown	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide catabolism	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of nucleobases, nucleosides and nucleotides.
0043419	name:Name:urea catabolic process	name:Synonym:urea breakdown	name:Synonym:urea catabolism	name:Synonym:urea decomposition	name:Synonym:urea degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of urea, the water soluble compound O=C-(NH2)2.
0046164	name:Name:alcohol catabolic process	name:Synonym:alcohol breakdown	name:Synonym:alcohol catabolism	name:Synonym:alcohol degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom.
0046265	name:Name:thiocyanate catabolic process	name:Synonym:thiocyanate breakdown	name:Synonym:thiocyanate catabolism	name:Synonym:thiocyanate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of thiocyanate, any anion of thiocyanic acid.
0046269	name:Name:toluene-4-sulfonate catabolic process	name:Synonym:4-toluenesulfonate catabolic process	name:Synonym:4-toluenesulfonate catabolism	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulfonate breakdown	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulfonate catabolism	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulfonate degradation	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulphonate catabolic process	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulphonate catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of toluene-4-sulfonate, 4-methylbenzenesulfonate, the anion of sulfonic acid attached to a methylbenzene molecule.
0046294	name:Name:formaldehyde catabolic process	name:Synonym:formaldehyde breakdown	name:Synonym:formaldehyde catabolism	name:Synonym:formaldehyde degradation	name:Synonym:methanal catabolic process	name:Synonym:methanal catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of formaldehyde (methanal, H2C=O), the simplest aldehyde.
0046149	name:Name:pigment catabolic process	name:Synonym:pigment breakdown	name:Synonym:pigment catabolism	name:Synonym:pigment degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, e.g. melanin.
0015996	name:Name:chlorophyll catabolic process	name:Synonym:chlorophyll breakdown	name:Synonym:chlorophyll catabolism	name:Synonym:chlorophyll degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of chlorophyll, any compound of magnesium complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring and which functions as a photosynthetic pigment, into less complex products.
0042167	name:Name:heme catabolic process	name:Synonym:haem catabolic process	name:Synonym:haem catabolism	name:Synonym:heme breakdown	name:Synonym:heme catabolism	name:Synonym:heme degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring.
0046150	name:Name:melanin catabolic process	name:Synonym:melanin breakdown	name:Synonym:melanin catabolism	name:Synonym:melanin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of melanins, pigments largely of animal origin. High molecular weight polymers of indole quinone, they are irregular polymeric structures and are divided into three groups: allomelanins in the plant kingdom and eumelanins and phaeomelanins in the animal kingdom.
0046151	name:Name:eye pigment catabolic process	name:Synonym:eye pigment breakdown	name:Synonym:eye pigment catabolism	name:Synonym:eye pigment degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of eye pigments, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, found or utilized in the eye.
0046159	name:Name:ocellus pigment catabolic process	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment breakdown	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment catabolism	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ocellus pigments, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, found or utilized in the ocellus, a minute simple eye found in many invertebrates.
0046284	name:Name:anthocyanin catabolic process	name:Synonym:anthocyanin breakdown	name:Synonym:anthocyanin catabolism	name:Synonym:anthocyanin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of anthocyanins, any member of a group of intensely colored soluble glycosides of anthocyanidins.
0046308	name:Name:Z-phenylacetaldoxime catabolic process	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime breakdown	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime catabolism	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of Z-phenylacetaldoxime, a member of the glucosinolate group of compounds.
0046434	name:Name:organophosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:organophosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:organophosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:organophosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of organophosphates, any phosphate-containing organic compound.
0009227	name:Name:nucleotide-sugar catabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar breakdown	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar catabolism	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of nucleotide-sugars, any nucleotide in which the distal phosphoric residue of a nucleoside 5'-diphosphate is in glycosidic linkage with a monosaccharide or monosaccharide derivative.
0015938	name:Name:coenzyme A catabolic process	name:Synonym:CoA catabolism	name:Synonym:coenzyme A breakdown	name:Synonym:coenzyme A catabolism	name:Synonym:coenzyme A degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of coenzyme A, 3'-phosphoadenosine-(5')diphospho(4')pantatheine, an acyl carrier in many acylation and acyl-transfer reactions in which the intermediate is a thiol ester.
0015971	name:Name:guanosine tetraphosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:guanosine tetraphosphate (5'-ppGpp-3') catabolic process	name:Synonym:guanosine tetraphosphate (5'-ppGpp-3') catabolism	name:Synonym:guanosine tetraphosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:guanosine tetraphosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:guanosine tetraphosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of guanine tetraphosphate (5'-ppGpp-3'), a derivative of guanine riboside with four phosphates.
0019339	name:Name:parathion catabolic process	name:Synonym:parathion breakdown	name:Synonym:parathion catabolism	name:Synonym:parathion degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of parathion, a highly toxic organophosphate compound. Degradation of parathion by sunlight or liver enzymes can result in the formation of the active compound paraoxon which interferes with the nervous system through cholinesterase inhibition.
0019364	name:Name:pyridine nucleotide catabolic process	name:Synonym:pyridine nucleotide breakdown	name:Synonym:pyridine nucleotide catabolism	name:Synonym:pyridine nucleotide degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a pyridine nucleotide, a nucleotide characterized by a pyridine derivative as a nitrogen base.
0019683	name:Name:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, an important intermediate in glycolysis.
0019700	name:Name:phosphonate catabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphonate breakdown	name:Synonym:phosphonate catabolism	name:Synonym:phosphonate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of phosphonates, any organic compound containing one or more C-PO(OH)2 or C-PO(OR)2 (with R=alkyl, aryl) groups. Catabolism of phosphonic acid itself, an inorganic compound without the biochemically relevant C-P bond, is not included.
0032361	name:Name:pyridoxal phosphate catabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of pyridoxal phosphate, pyridoxal phosphorylated at the hydroxymethyl group of C-5, the active form of vitamin B6.
0046386	name:Name:deoxyribose phosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of deoxyribose phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 2-deoxy-erythro-pentose.
0071545	name:Name:inositol phosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate degradation	name:Synonym:myo-inositol phosphate catabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of an inositol phosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, with one or more phosphate groups attached.
0009058	name:Name:biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:anabolism	name:Synonym:biosynthesis	name:Synonym:formation	name:Synonym:synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances; typically the energy-requiring part of metabolism in which simpler substances are transformed into more complex ones.
0006723	name:Name:cuticle hydrocarbon biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cuticle hydrocarbon anabolism	name:Synonym:cuticle hydrocarbon biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cuticle hydrocarbon formation	name:Synonym:cuticle hydrocarbon synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of hydrocarbons that make up the cuticle, the outer layer of some animals and plants, which acts to prevent water loss.
0008610	name:Name:lipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:lipid anabolism	name:Synonym:lipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:lipid formation	name:Synonym:lipid synthesis	name:Synonym:lipogenesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of lipids, compounds soluble in an organic solvent but not, or sparingly, in an aqueous solvent.
0006633	name:Name:fatty acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:fatty acid anabolism	name:Synonym:fatty acid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:fatty acid formation	name:Synonym:fatty acid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a fatty acid, any of the aliphatic monocarboxylic acids that can be liberated by hydrolysis from naturally occurring fats and oils. Fatty acids are predominantly straight-chain acids of 4 to 24 carbon atoms, which may be saturated or unsaturated; branched fatty acids and hydroxy fatty acids also occur, and very long chain acids of over 30 carbons are found in waxes.
0006694	name:Name:steroid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:steroid anabolism	name:Synonym:steroid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:steroid formation	name:Synonym:steroid synthesis	name:Synonym:steroidogenesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of steroids, compounds with a 1,2,cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nucleus; includes de novo formation and steroid interconversion by modification.
0008299	name:Name:isoprenoid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:isoprenoid anabolism	name:Synonym:isoprenoid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:isoprenoid formation	name:Synonym:isoprenoid synthesis	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid anabolism	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid formation	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid synthesis	name:Synonym:polyterpene biosynthesis	name:Synonym:polyterpene biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any isoprenoid compound, isoprene (2-methylbuta-1,3-diene) or compounds containing or derived from linked isoprene (3-methyl-2-butenylene) residues.
0008654	name:Name:phospholipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phospholipid anabolism	name:Synonym:phospholipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phospholipid formation	name:Synonym:phospholipid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phospholipids, any lipid containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
0009103	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:lipopolysaccharide anabolism	name:Synonym:lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:lipopolysaccharide formation	name:Synonym:lipopolysaccharide synthesis	name:Synonym:LPS biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of lipopolysaccharides, any of a group of related, structurally complex components of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria.
0045017	name:Name:glycerolipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glycerolipid anabolism	name:Synonym:glycerolipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glycerolipid formation	name:Synonym:glycerolipid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycerolipids, any lipid with a glycerol backbone.
0046460	name:Name:neutral lipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:neutral lipid anabolism	name:Synonym:neutral lipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:neutral lipid formation	name:Synonym:neutral lipid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of neutral lipids, lipids only soluble in solvents of very low polarity.
0046467	name:Name:membrane lipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:membrane lipid anabolism	name:Synonym:membrane lipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:membrane lipid formation	name:Synonym:membrane lipid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of membrane lipids, any lipid found in or associated with a biological membrane.
0046506	name:Name:sulfolipid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:sulfolipid anabolism	name:Synonym:sulfolipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sulfolipid formation	name:Synonym:sulfolipid synthesis	name:Synonym:sulpholipid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sulpholipid biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of sulfolipid, a compound containing a sulfonic acid residue joined by a carbon-sulfur bond to a lipid.
0097040	name:Name:phthiocerol biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phthiocerol anabolism	name:Synonym:phthiocerol biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phthiocerol formation	name:Synonym:phthiocerol synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phthiocerol, a lipid-based 1,3-glycol consisting of (3S,4R)-3-methoxy-4-methylnonacosane having (9R)- and (11S)-hydroxy substituents.
0097041	name:Name:phenolic phthiocerol biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phenolic phthiocerol anabolism	name:Synonym:phenolic phthiocerol biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phenolic phthiocerol formation	name:Synonym:phenolic phthiocerol synthesis	name:Synonym:phenolphthiocerol biosynthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phenolic phthiocerol, a phthiocerol derivative having a 4-hydroxyphenyl substituent at the 29-position.
0009059	name:Name:macromolecule biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:biopolymer biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:macromolecule anabolism	name:Synonym:macromolecule biosynthesis	name:Synonym:macromolecule formation	name:Synonym:macromolecule synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a macromolecule, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass.
0000271	name:Name:polysaccharide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glycan biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glycan biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:polysaccharide anabolism	name:Synonym:polysaccharide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:polysaccharide formation	name:Synonym:polysaccharide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of polysaccharides, polymers of more than 10 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages.
0002378	name:Name:immunoglobulin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:antibody biosynthesis	name:Synonym:antibody biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of immunoglobulin.
0019081	name:Name:viral protein biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:viral protein anabolism	name:Synonym:viral protein biosynthesis	name:Synonym:viral protein formation	name:Synonym:viral protein synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of viral proteins.
0031108	name:Name:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier protein] biosynthesis	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] anabolism	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] biosynthesis	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] formation	name:Synonym:holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of holo-[acyl-carrier protein].
0032800	name:Name:receptor biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:receptor anabolism	name:Synonym:receptor biosynthesis	name:Synonym:receptor formation	name:Synonym:receptor synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a receptor molecule, a macromolecule that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
0032964	name:Name:collagen biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:collagen anabolism	name:Synonym:collagen biosynthesis	name:Synonym:collagen formation	name:Synonym:collagen synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of collagen, any of a group of fibrous proteins of very high tensile strength that form the main component of connective tissue in animals. Collagen is highly enriched in glycine (some regions are 33% glycine) and proline, occurring predominantly as 3-hydroxyproline (about 20%).
0034645	name:Name:cellular macromolecule biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cellular biopolymer biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule anabolism	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule formation	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a macromolecule, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass, carried out by individual cells.
0042621	name:Name:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:PHA biosynthesis	name:Synonym:PHA biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) anabolism	name:Synonym:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) biosynthesis	name:Synonym:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) formation	name:Synonym:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates), polyesters of 3-hydroxyacids produced as intracellular granules by a large variety of bacteria.
0042964	name:Name:thioredoxin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thioredoxin anabolism	name:Synonym:thioredoxin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thioredoxin formation	name:Synonym:thioredoxin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of thioredoxin, a small disulfide-containing redox protein that serves as a general protein disulfide oxidoreductase.
0042965	name:Name:glutaredoxin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glutaredoxin anabolism	name:Synonym:glutaredoxin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glutaredoxin formation	name:Synonym:glutaredoxin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a small disulfide-containing redox protein that serves as a glutathione-disulfide oxidoreductase.
0042966	name:Name:biotin carboxyl carrier protein biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:BCCP biosynthesis	name:Synonym:BCCP biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:biotin carboxyl carrier protein anabolism	name:Synonym:biotin carboxyl carrier protein biosynthesis	name:Synonym:biotin carboxyl carrier protein formation	name:Synonym:biotin carboxyl carrier protein synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of the biotin carboxyl carrier protein, a subunit of acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase.
0042967	name:Name:acyl-carrier-protein biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ACP biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ACP biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:acyl carrier protein biosynthesis	name:Synonym:acyl carrier protein biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:acyl-carrier protein biosynthesis	name:Synonym:acyl-carrier-protein anabolism	name:Synonym:acyl-carrier-protein biosynthesis	name:Synonym:acyl-carrier-protein formation	name:Synonym:acyl-carrier-protein synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of acyl-carrier protein.
0045112	name:Name:integrin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:integrin anabolism	name:Synonym:integrin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:integrin formation	name:Synonym:integrin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of integrins, a large family of transmembrane proteins that act as receptors for cell-adhesion molecules.
0045341	name:Name:MHC class I biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex class I biosynthesis	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex class I biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:MHC class I anabolism	name:Synonym:MHC class I biosynthesis	name:Synonym:MHC class I formation	name:Synonym:MHC class I synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of major histocompatibility protein class I.
0045342	name:Name:MHC class II biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex class II biosynthesis	name:Synonym:major histocompatibility complex class II biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:MHC class II anabolism	name:Synonym:MHC class II biosynthesis	name:Synonym:MHC class II formation	name:Synonym:MHC class II synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of major histocompatibility protein class II.
0048152	name:Name:S100 beta biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:S100 beta anabolism	name:Synonym:S100 beta biosynthesis	name:Synonym:S100 beta formation	name:Synonym:S100 beta synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of S100 beta protein. S100 is a small calcium and zinc binding protein produced in astrocytes that is implicated in Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome and ALS.
0048153	name:Name:S100 alpha biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:S100 alpha anabolism	name:Synonym:S100 alpha biosynthesis	name:Synonym:S100 alpha formation	name:Synonym:S100 alpha synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of S100 alpha protein. S100 is a small calcium and zinc binding protein produced in astrocytes that is implicated in Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome and ALS.
0050757	name:Name:thymidylate synthase biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thymidylate synthase anabolism	name:Synonym:thymidylate synthase biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thymidylate synthase formation	name:Synonym:thymidylate synthase synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of the enzyme thymidylate synthase, which catalyzes the reaction: 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate + dUMP = dihydrofolate + dTMP.
0051767	name:Name:nitric-oxide synthase biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:NO synthase biosynthesis	name:Synonym:NO synthase biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:NOS biosynthesis	name:Synonym:NOS biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nitric-oxide synthase, an enzyme which catalyzes the reaction L-arginine + n NADPH + n H+ + m O2 = citrulline + nitric oxide + n NADP+.
0051768	name:Name:nitric-oxide synthase 2 biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nitric-oxide synthase (type 2) biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nitric-oxide synthase (type 2) biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nitric-oxide synthase (type II) biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nitric-oxide synthase (type II) biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:NOS2 synthase biosynthesis	name:Synonym:NOS2 synthase biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nitric-oxide synthase 2, an enzyme which catalyzes the reaction L-arginine + n NADPH + n H+ + m O2 = citrulline + nitric oxide + n NADP+.
0016051	name:Name:carbohydrate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:anabolic carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:anabolic carbohydrate metabolism	name:Synonym:carbohydrate anabolism	name:Synonym:carbohydrate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:carbohydrate formation	name:Synonym:carbohydrate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0009312	name:Name:oligosaccharide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide anabolism	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide formation	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
0019578	name:Name:aldaric acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:aldaric acid anabolism	name:Synonym:aldaric acid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:aldaric acid formation	name:Synonym:aldaric acid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of aldaric acid, any dicarboxylic acid formed by oxidation of by the terminal groups of an aldose to carboxyl group.
0019685	name:Name:photosynthesis, dark reaction	info:Definition:A complex cycle of enzyme-mediated reactions which catalyzes the reduction of carbon dioxide to sugar. As well as carbon dioxide the cycle requires reducing power in the form of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) and chemical energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The reduced NADP (NADPH) and ATP are produced by the 'light' reactions.
0034637	name:Name:cellular carbohydrate biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, carried out by individual cells.
0046399	name:Name:glucuronate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glucuronate anabolism	name:Synonym:glucuronate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glucuronate formation	name:Synonym:glucuronate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glucuronate, the anion of glucuronic acid.
0042446	name:Name:hormone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:hormone anabolism	name:Synonym:hormone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:hormone formation	name:Synonym:hormone synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any hormone, naturally occurring substances secreted by specialized cells that affects the metabolism or behavior of other cells possessing functional receptors for the hormone.
0006700	name:Name:C21-steroid hormone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone anabolism	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone formation	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of C21-steroid hormones, steroid compounds containing 21 carbons which function as hormones.
0006702	name:Name:androgen biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:androgen anabolism	name:Synonym:androgen biosynthesis	name:Synonym:androgen formation	name:Synonym:androgen synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of androgens, C19 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of male sexual characteristics.
0006703	name:Name:estrogen biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:estrogen anabolism	name:Synonym:estrogen biosynthesis	name:Synonym:estrogen formation	name:Synonym:estrogen synthesis	name:Synonym:oestrogen biosynthesis	name:Synonym:oestrogen biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of estrogens, C18 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of female sexual characteristics. Also found in plants.
0006718	name:Name:juvenile hormone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone anabolism	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone formation	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of juvenile hormones, the three sesquiterpenoid derivatives that function to maintain the larval state of insects at molting and that may be required for other processes, e.g. oogenesis.
0009691	name:Name:cytokinin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cytokinin anabolism	name:Synonym:cytokinin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cytokinin formation	name:Synonym:cytokinin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cytokinins, a class of adenine-derived compounds that can function in plants as growth regulators.
0009851	name:Name:auxin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:auxin anabolism	name:Synonym:auxin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:auxin formation	name:Synonym:auxin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of auxins, plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0016132	name:Name:brassinosteroid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid anabolism	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid formation	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of brassinosteroids, any of a group of steroid derivatives that occur at very low concentrations in plant tissues and may have hormone-like effects.
0030187	name:Name:melatonin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:melatonin anabolism	name:Synonym:melatonin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:melatonin formation	name:Synonym:melatonin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine).
0042811	name:Name:pheromone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:pheromone anabolism	name:Synonym:pheromone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pheromone formation	name:Synonym:pheromone synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of pheromones, a substance that is secreted and released by an organism and detected by a second organism of the same or a closely related species, in which it causes a specific reaction, such as a definite behavioral reaction or a developmental process.
0045456	name:Name:ecdysteroid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid anabolism	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid formation	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ecdysteroids, a group of polyhydroxylated ketosteroids which initiate post-embryonic development.
0044034	name:Name:multi-organism biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism biosynthesis	name:Synonym:multi-organismal biosynthesis	name:Synonym:multi-organismal biosynthetic process	info:Definition:Any biosynthetic process - chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances - which involves more than one organism.
0052226	name:Name:biosynthesis of substance in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:biosynthesis of substance in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism in a second organism resulting in the formation of substances, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044249	name:Name:cellular biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cellular anabolism	name:Synonym:cellular biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cellular formation	name:Synonym:cellular synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances, carried out by individual cells.
0002138	name:Name:retinoic acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:retinoic acid anabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the biosynthesis of retinoic acid, one of the three components that makes up vitamin A.
0006799	name:Name:polyphosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:polyphosphate anabolism	name:Synonym:polyphosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:polyphosphate formation	name:Synonym:polyphosphate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a polyphosphate, the anion or salt of polyphosphoric acid.
0009110	name:Name:vitamin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:vitamin anabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:vitamin formation	name:Synonym:vitamin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a vitamin, one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0009226	name:Name:nucleotide-sugar biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar anabolism	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar formation	name:Synonym:nucleotide-sugar synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nucleotide-sugars, any nucleotide in which the distal phosphoric residue of a nucleoside 5'-diphosphate is in glycosidic linkage with a monosaccharide or monosaccharide derivative.
0009403	name:Name:toxin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:toxin anabolism	name:Synonym:toxin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:toxin formation	name:Synonym:toxin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of toxin, a poisonous compound (typically a protein) that is produced by cells or organisms and that can cause disease when introduced into the body or tissues of an organism.
0010192	name:Name:mucilage biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:mucilage anabolism	name:Synonym:mucilage biosynthesis	name:Synonym:mucilage formation	name:Synonym:mucilage synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of mucilage, a gelatinous substance secreted by plants.
0016053	name:Name:organic acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:organic acid anabolism	name:Synonym:organic acid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:organic acid formation	name:Synonym:organic acid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of organic acids, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage.
0016063	name:Name:rhodopsin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:rhodopsin anabolism	name:Synonym:rhodopsin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:rhodopsin formation	name:Synonym:rhodopsin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of rhodopsin, a brilliant purplish-red, light-sensitive visual pigment found in the rod cells of the retinas.
0017000	name:Name:antibiotic biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:antibiotic anabolism	name:Synonym:antibiotic biosynthesis	name:Synonym:antibiotic formation	name:Synonym:antibiotic synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an antibiotic, a substance produced by or derived from certain fungi, bacteria, and other organisms, that can destroy or inhibit the growth of other microorganisms.
0017180	name:Name:peptidyl-diphthine biosynthetic process from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine anabolism from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine formation from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthine synthesis from peptidyl-histidine	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of peptidyl-diphthine from other compounds, including peptidyl-histidine.
0017183	name:Name:peptidyl-diphthamide biosynthetic process from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide anabolism from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide formation from peptidyl-histidine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-diphthamide synthesis from peptidyl-histidine	info:Definition:The modification of peptidyl-histidine to 2'-(3-carboxamido-3-(trimethylammonio)propyl)-L-histidine, known as diphthamide, found in translation elongation factor eEF-2.
0018130	name:Name:heterocycle biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:heterocycle anabolism	name:Synonym:heterocycle biosynthesis	name:Synonym:heterocycle formation	name:Synonym:heterocycle synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of heterocyclic compounds, those with a cyclic molecular structure and at least two different atoms in the ring (or rings).
0018173	name:Name:peptidyl-1-thioglycine biosynthetic process from peptidyl-glycine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-1-thioglycine anabolism from peptidyl-glycine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-1-thioglycine formation from peptidyl-glycine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-1-thioglycine synthesis from peptidyl-glycine	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of peptidyl-1-thioglycine from other compounds, including peptidyl-glycine.
0018250	name:Name:peptidyl-dehydroalanine biosynthetic process from peptidyl-tyrosine or peptidyl-serine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-dehydroalanine anabolism from peptidyl-tyrosine or peptidyl-serine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-dehydroalanine formation from peptidyl-tyrosine or peptidyl-serine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-dehydroalanine synthesis from peptidyl-tyrosine or peptidyl-serine	info:Definition:The formation of peptidyl-dehydroalanine from either peptidyl-tyrosine by phenyl transfer, or from peptidyl-serine, which is coupled with the formation of 5-imidazolinone by the two neighboring residues, produces an 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one active site of some amino acid ammonia-lyases; the 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one, is formed autocatalytically by cyclization and dehydration of the sequence ASG.
0019438	name:Name:aromatic compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:aromatic compound anabolism	name:Synonym:aromatic compound biosynthesis	name:Synonym:aromatic compound formation	name:Synonym:aromatic compound synthesis	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon biosynthesis	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of aromatic compounds, any substance containing an aromatic carbon ring.
0019680	name:Name:L-methylmalonyl-CoA biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:L-methylmalonyl-CoA anabolism	name:Synonym:L-methylmalonyl-CoA biosynthesis	name:Synonym:L-methylmalonyl-CoA formation	name:Synonym:L-methylmalonyl-CoA synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of L-methylmalonyl-CoA, the L-enantiomer of 2-carboxypropanoyl-CoA.
0019879	name:Name:peptidyl-thyronine biosynthetic process from peptidyl-tyrosine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-thyronine anabolism from peptidyl-tyrosine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-thyronine formation from peptidyl-tyrosine	name:Synonym:peptidyl-thyronine synthesis from peptidyl-tyrosine	info:Definition:The formation of peptidyl-thyronine from peptidyl-tyrosine in thyroglobulin by phenyl transfer coupled with the formation of peptidyl-dehydroalanine.
0032774	name:Name:RNA biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:RNA anabolism	name:Synonym:RNA biosynthesis	name:Synonym:RNA formation	name:Synonym:RNA synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of RNA, ribonucleic acid, one of the two main type of nucleic acid, consisting of a long, unbranched macromolecule formed from ribonucleotides joined in 3',5'-phosphodiester linkage. Includes polymerization of ribonucleotide monomers.
0032923	name:Name:phosphonate biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phosphonates, any organic compound containing one or more C-PO(OH)2 or C-PO(OR)2 (with R=alkyl, aryl) groups. Synthesis of phosphonic acid itself, an inorganic compound without the biochemically relevant C-P bond, is not included.
0035384	name:Name:thioester biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:thioester anabolism	name:Synonym:thioester biosynthesis	name:Synonym:thioester formation	name:Synonym:thioester synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a thioester, a compound of general formula RC(=O)SR' in which the linking oxygen in an ester is replaced by a sulfur atom. They are the product of esterification between a carboxylic acid and a thiol.
0042136	name:Name:neurotransmitter biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter anabolism	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter biosynthesis	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter biosynthesis and storage	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter biosynthetic process and storage	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter formation	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of any of a group of substances that are released on excitation from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell.
0042181	name:Name:ketone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ketone anabolism	name:Synonym:ketone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ketone formation	name:Synonym:ketone synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ketones, a class of organic compounds that contain the carbonyl group, CO, and in which the carbonyl group is bonded only to carbon atoms. The general formula for a ketone is RCOR, where R and R are alkyl or aryl groups.
0042438	name:Name:melanin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:melanin anabolism	name:Synonym:melanin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:melanin formation	name:Synonym:melanin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of melanins, pigments largely of animal origin. High molecular weight polymers of indole quinone, they are irregular polymeric structures and are divided into three groups: allomelanins in the plant kingdom and eumelanins and phaeomelanins in the animal kingdom.
0043043	name:Name:peptide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:peptide anabolism	name:Synonym:peptide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:peptide formation	name:Synonym:peptide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of peptides, compounds of 2 or more (but usually less than 100) amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another. This may include the translation of a precursor protein and its subsequent processing into a functional peptide.
0043094	name:Name:cellular metabolic compound salvage	info:Definition:Any process which produces a useful metabolic compound from derivatives of it without de novo synthesis, as carried out by individual cells.
0043447	name:Name:alkane biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:alkane anabolism	name:Synonym:alkane biosynthesis	name:Synonym:alkane formation	name:Synonym:alkane synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an alkane, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having the general formula CnH2n+2.
0043450	name:Name:alkene biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:alkene anabolism	name:Synonym:alkene biosynthesis	name:Synonym:alkene formation	name:Synonym:alkene synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an alkene, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having one carbon-carbon double bond and the general formula CnH2n.
0043453	name:Name:alkyne biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:alkyne anabolism	name:Synonym:alkyne biosynthesis	name:Synonym:alkyne formation	name:Synonym:alkyne synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an alkyne, any cyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having a carbon-carbon triple bond and the general formula CnH2n-2.
0044108	name:Name:cellular alcohol biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom, carried out at the level of an individual cell.
0044272	name:Name:sulfur compound biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:sulfur biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sulfur biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:sulfur compound anabolism	name:Synonym:sulfur compound biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sulfur compound formation	name:Synonym:sulfur compound synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of compounds that contain sulfur, such as the amino acids methionine and cysteine or the tripeptide glutathione.
0046184	name:Name:aldehyde biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:aldehyde anabolism	name:Synonym:aldehyde biosynthesis	name:Synonym:aldehyde formation	name:Synonym:aldehyde synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of aldehydes, any organic compound with the formula R-CH=O.
0046414	name:Name:organomercury biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:organomercury anabolism	name:Synonym:organomercury biosynthesis	name:Synonym:organomercury formation	name:Synonym:organomercury synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of organomercury compounds, any organic compound containing a mercury atom.
0046504	name:Name:glycerol ether biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glycerol ether anabolism	name:Synonym:glycerol ether biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glycerol ether formation	name:Synonym:glycerol ether synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycerol ethers, any anhydride formed between two organic hydroxy compounds, one of which is glycerol.
0046951	name:Name:ketone body biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ketone body anabolism	name:Synonym:ketone body biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ketone body formation	name:Synonym:ketone body synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ketone bodies, any one of the three substances: acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate) or acetone. Biosynthesis involves the formation of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA, which is cleaved to acetate and acetyl-CoA.
0050665	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:H2O2 biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide anabolism	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide formation	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide generation	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a potentially harmful byproduct of aerobic cellular respiration which can cause damage to DNA.
0051188	name:Name:cofactor biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cofactor anabolism	name:Synonym:cofactor biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cofactor formation	name:Synonym:cofactor synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a cofactor, a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein.
0052315	name:Name:phytoalexin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phytoalexin biosynthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phytoalexins, any of a range of substances produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0044274	name:Name:multicellular organismal biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:organismal anabolism	name:Synonym:organismal biosynthesis	name:Synonym:organismal formation	name:Synonym:organismal synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances in multicellular organisms, occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0044283	name:Name:small molecule biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:small molecule biosynthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of small molecules, any monomeric molecule of small relative molecular mass.
0002149	name:Name:hypochlorous acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:HClO biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:HOCl biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorite biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorous acid biosynthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of hypochlorous acid.
0034404	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide anabolism	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide biosynthesis	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide formation	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of nucleobases, nucleosides and nucleotides.
0034418	name:Name:urate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:urate anabolism	name:Synonym:urate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:urate formation	name:Synonym:urate synthesis	name:Synonym:uric acid biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of urate, the anion of uric acid, 2,6,8-trioxypurine.
0046165	name:Name:alcohol biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:alcohol anabolism	name:Synonym:alcohol biosynthesis	name:Synonym:alcohol formation	name:Synonym:alcohol synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom.
0046293	name:Name:formaldehyde biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:formaldehyde anabolism	name:Synonym:formaldehyde biosynthesis	name:Synonym:formaldehyde formation	name:Synonym:formaldehyde synthesis	name:Synonym:methanal biosynthesis	name:Synonym:methanal biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of formaldehyde (methanal, H2C=O), the simplest aldehyde.
0046148	name:Name:pigment biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:pigment anabolism	name:Synonym:pigment biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pigment formation	name:Synonym:pigment synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, e.g. melanin.
0006726	name:Name:eye pigment biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:eye pigment anabolism	name:Synonym:eye pigment biosynthesis	name:Synonym:eye pigment formation	name:Synonym:eye pigment synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of eye pigments, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, found or utilized in the eye.
0006728	name:Name:pteridine biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:pteridine anabolism	name:Synonym:pteridine biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pteridine formation	name:Synonym:pteridine synthesis	name:Synonym:pterin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pterin biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of pteridine, pyrazino(2,3-dipyrimidine), the parent structure of pterins and the pteroyl group.
0006783	name:Name:heme biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:haem biosynthesis	name:Synonym:haem biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:heme anabolism	name:Synonym:heme biosynthesis	name:Synonym:heme formation	name:Synonym:heme synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring, from less complex precursors.
0008055	name:Name:ocellus pigment biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment anabolism	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment formation	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ocellus pigments, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, found or utilized in the ocellus, a minute simple eye found in many invertebrates.
0009113	name:Name:purine base biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:purine base anabolism	name:Synonym:purine base biosynthesis	name:Synonym:purine base formation	name:Synonym:purine base synthesis	name:Synonym:purine nucleobase biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of purine bases, one of the two classes of nitrogen-containing ring compounds found in DNA and RNA, which include adenine and guanine.
0009718	name:Name:anthocyanin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:anthocyanin anabolism	name:Synonym:anthocyanin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:anthocyanin formation	name:Synonym:anthocyanin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of anthocyanins, any member of a group of intensely colored soluble glycosides of anthocyanidins.
0015995	name:Name:chlorophyll biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:chlorophyll anabolism	name:Synonym:chlorophyll biosynthesis	name:Synonym:chlorophyll formation	name:Synonym:chlorophyll synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of chlorophyll, any compound of magnesium complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring and which functions as a photosynthetic pigment, from less complex precursors.
0016117	name:Name:carotenoid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:carotenoid anabolism	name:Synonym:carotenoid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:carotenoid formation	name:Synonym:carotenoid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of carotenoids, tetraterpenoid compounds in which two units of 4 isoprenoid residues joined head-to-tail are themselves joined tail-to-tail.
0043477	name:Name:pigment biosynthetic process involved in pigment accumulation	name:Synonym:pigment biosynthetic process during pigment accumulation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, resulting in pigment accumulation.
0048543	name:Name:phytochrome chromophore biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phytochrome chromophore anabolism	name:Synonym:phytochrome chromophore biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phytochrome chromophore formation	name:Synonym:phytochrome chromophore synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of the phytochrome chromophore. The phytochrome chromophore is a linear tetrapyrrolic prosthetic group covalently attached to the large soluble protein phytochrome. Light absorption by the phytochrome chromophore triggers photoconversion between two spectrally distinct forms of the photoreceptor: Pr, the red light absorbing form, and Pfr, the far red light absorbing form.
0051551	name:Name:aurone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:benzalcoumaran-3-one biosynthesis	name:Synonym:benzalcoumaran-3-one biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of aurones, a series of yellow plant pigments.
0051553	name:Name:flavone biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one biosynthesis	name:Synonym:2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:2-phenylchromone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:2-phenylchromone biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of flavones, a class of pigmented plant compounds based on 2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (2-phenylchromone).
0051559	name:Name:phlobaphene biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phlobaphenes, red pigments with oligomeric or polymeric structure derived from the flavonoid intermediate flavan-4-ols.
0046307	name:Name:Z-phenylacetaldoxime biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime anabolism	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime biosynthesis	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime formation	name:Synonym:Z-phenylacetaldoxime synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of Z-phenylacetaldoxime, a member of the glucosinolate group of compounds.
0090407	name:Name:organophosphate biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the biosynthesis of deoxyribose phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 2-deoxy-erythro-pentose.
0032958	name:Name:inositol phosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate anabolism	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate formation	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate synthesis	name:Synonym:myo-inositol phosphate biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an inositol phosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, with one or more phosphate groups attached.
0046385	name:Name:deoxyribose phosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate anabolism	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate formation	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of deoxyribose phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 2-deoxy-erythro-pentose.
0019637	name:Name:organophosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:organophosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organophosphates, any phosphate-containing organic compound.
0006072	name:Name:glycerol-3-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycerol-3-phosphate, a phosphoric monoester of glycerol.
0046167	name:Name:glycerol-3-phosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate anabolism	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate formation	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycerol-3-phosphate, a phosphoric monoester of glycerol.
0046168	name:Name:glycerol-3-phosphate catabolic process	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate breakdown	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate catabolism	name:Synonym:glycerol-3-phosphate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycerol-3-phosphate, a phosphoric monoester of glycerol.
0006644	name:Name:phospholipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:phospholipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phospholipids, any lipid containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
0006650	name:Name:glycerophospholipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:alpha-glycerophosphate pathway	name:Synonym:glycerophospholipid metabolism	name:Synonym:phosphoglyceride metabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphoglyceride metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycerophospholipids, any derivative of glycerophosphate that contains at least one O-acyl, O-alkyl, or O-alkenyl group attached to the glycerol residue.
0006668	name:Name:sphinganine-1-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:sphinganine-1-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sphinganine-1-phosphate, the phosphorylated derivative of D-erythro-2-amino-1,3-octadecanediol.
0006673	name:Name:inositolphosphoceramide metabolic process	name:Synonym:inositolphosphoceramide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving inositolphosphoceramides, any lipid with a phosphodiester bridge between an inositol residue and the ceramide group.
0006684	name:Name:sphingomyelin metabolic process	name:Synonym:sphingomyelin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sphingomyelin, N-acyl-4-sphingenyl-1-O-phosphorylcholine, any of a class of phospholipids in which the amino group of sphingosine is in amide linkage with one of several fatty acids, while the terminal hydroxyl group of sphingosine is esterified to phosphorylcholine.
0009395	name:Name:phospholipid catabolic process	name:Synonym:phospholipid breakdown	name:Synonym:phospholipid catabolism	name:Synonym:phospholipid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of phospholipids, any lipid containing phosphoric acid as a mono- or diester.
0033383	name:Name:geranyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:geranyl diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:geranyldiphosphate metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving geranyl diphosphate, the universal precursor of the monoterpenes.
0033385	name:Name:geranylgeranyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyl diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:geranylgeranyldiphosphate metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving geranylgeranyl diphosphate, a polyprenol compound involved in the biosynthesis of a variety of terpenoids including chlorophylls, carotenoids, tocopherols, plastoquinones, and the plant hormones gibberellins.
0033519	name:Name:phytyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytyl diphosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytyl diphosphate, (2E)-3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadec-2-en-1-yl trihydrogen diphosphate.
0045338	name:Name:farnesyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:farnesyl diphosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving farnesyl diphosphate, an intermediate in carotenoid, sesquiterpene, squalene and sterol biosynthesis, as well as a substrate in protein farnesylation.
0046465	name:Name:dolichyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dolichyl diphosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dolichyl diphosphate, a diphosphorylated dolichol derivative. In eukaryotes, these function as carriers of mono- and oligosaccharide residues in the glycosylation of lipids and proteins within intracellular membranes.
0046490	name:Name:isopentenyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:IPP metabolic process	name:Synonym:IPP metabolism	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:isopentenyl pyrophosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:isopentenyl pyrophosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving isopentenyl diphosphate, an isomer of dimethylallyl diphosphate and the key precursor of all isoprenoids.
0046493	name:Name:lipid A metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipid A metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lipid A, the glycolipid group of bacterial lipopolysaccharides, consisting of six fatty acyl chains linked to two glucosamine residues.
0050993	name:Name:dimethylallyl diphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl diphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl pyrophosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethylallyl pyrophosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:DPP metabolic process	name:Synonym:DPP metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dimethylallyl diphosphate.
0018920	name:Name:glyphosate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glyphosate metabolism	name:Synonym:Roundup metabolic process	name:Synonym:Roundup metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glyphosate, a broad-spectrum herbicide also known by the trade name Roundup. It is a member of a broad class of compounds known as phosphonic acids, which contain a direct carbon-to-phosphorus (C-P) bond.
0018952	name:Name:parathion metabolic process	name:Synonym:parathion metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving parathion, a highly toxic organophosphate compound formerly used as a broad spectrum insecticide, acaricide, fumigant and nematocide. Degradation of parathion by sunlight or liver enzymes can result in the formation of the active compound paraoxon which interferes with the nervous system through cholinesterase inhibition.
0019682	name:Name:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, an important intermediate in glycolysis.
0019288	name:Name:isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthetic process, mevalonate-independent pathway	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate anabolism, mevalonate-independent pathway	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthesis, mevalonate-independent	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthesis, non-mevalonate pathway	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthetic process, mevalonate-independent	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthetic process, non-mevalonate pathway	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate formation, mevalonate-independent pathway	name:Synonym:isopentenyl diphosphate synthesis, mevalonate-independent pathway	name:Synonym:mevalonate-independent isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:mevalonate-independent isopentenyl diphosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:non-MVA pathway	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of isopentenyl diphosphate by the mevalonate-independent pathway. Isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) is the fundamental unit in isoprenoid biosynthesis and is biosynthesized from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate via intermediates, including 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate.
0046166	name:Name:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate anabolism	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate formation	name:Synonym:glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, an important intermediate in glycolysis.
0019692	name:Name:deoxyribose phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving deoxyribose phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 2-deoxy-erythro-pentose.
0046384	name:Name:2-deoxyribose 1-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-deoxyribose 1-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:deoxyribose 1-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose 1-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2-deoxyribose 1-phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 1-phospho-2-deoxyribose.
0046387	name:Name:deoxyribose 1,5-bisphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose 1,5-bisphosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving deoxyribose 1,5-bisphosphate, the diphosphorylated sugar 1,5-diphospho-2-deoxyribose.
0046389	name:Name:deoxyribose 5-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:deoxyribose 5-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving deoxyribose 5-phosphate, the phosphorylated sugar 5-phospho-2-deoxyribose.
0043647	name:Name:inositol phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:inositol phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:myo-inositol phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:myo-inositol phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving inositol phosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, with one or more phosphate groups attached.
0032957	name:Name:inositol trisphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:inositol trisphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:IP3 metabolic process	name:Synonym:IP3 metabolism	name:Synonym:myo-inositol trisphosphate metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving myo-inositol phosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, with three phosphate groups attached.
0033517	name:Name:myo-inositol hexakisphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:myo-inositol hexakisphosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:phytate metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytic acid, myo-inositol hexakisphosphate, a regulator of intracellular signaling, a highly abundant animal anti-nutrient and a phosphate and mineral storage compound in plant seeds.
0071543	name:Name:diphosphoinositol polyphosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:diphosphoinositol polyphosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a diphosphoinositol polyphosphate, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol with one or more diphosphate groups and multiple monophosphate groups attached.
0051167	name:Name:xylulose 5-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:D-xylulose 5-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:D-xylulose 5-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:D-xylulose-5-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:D-xylulose-5-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:xylulose 5-phosphate metabolism	name:Synonym:xylulose-5-phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:xylulose-5-phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving xylulose 5-phosphate, a derivative of the ketopentose xylulose phosphorylated at the 5 carbon; it is an intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway.
0019488	name:Name:ribitol catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:ribitol breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:ribitol degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:ribitol utilization	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of ribitol to form xylulose 5-phosphate. Ribitol is initially converted to D-ribulose, which is phosphorylated to form ribulose 5-phosphate, which is then converted into xylulose 5-phosphate.
0019528	name:Name:D-arabitol catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:D-arabitol breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:D-arabitol degradation	name:Synonym:D-arabitol degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:D-arabitol utilization	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of D-arabitol to form xylulose 5-phosphate. D-arabitol is converted into D-xylulose, which is then phosphorylated to form D-xylulose-5-phosphate.
0019569	name:Name:L-arabinose catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabinose breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabinose degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-arabinose into other compounds, including xylulose 5-phosphate.
0019573	name:Name:D-arabinose catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:D-arabinose breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:D-arabinose degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of D-arabinose to form xylulose 5-phosphate. D-arabinose is converted into D-ribulose, which is phosphorylated to ribulose-5-phosphate, which is isomerized to give D-xylulose-5-phosphate.
0019590	name:Name:L-arabitol catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabitol and xylitol degradation	name:Synonym:L-arabitol breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabitol degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabitol utilization	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-arabitol to form xylulose 5-phosphate. L-arabitol is converted into L-xylulose, which is then phosphorylated to L-xylulose-5-phosphate. This is converted to D-xylulose-5-phosphate via the intermediate L-ribulose-5-phosphate.
0019640	name:Name:glucuronate catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:glucuronate breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:glucuronate degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glucuronate into other compounds, including xylulose 5-phosphate.
0019648	name:Name:formaldehyde assimilation via xylulose monophosphate cycle	name:Synonym:formaldehyde assimilation via xylulose-5-phosphate cycle	name:Synonym:formaldehyde fixation cycle	info:Definition:The pathway in which formaldehyde is used as a carbon source in the xylulose monophosphate cycle. Methylotrophic yeasts, but not bacteria, utilize the xylulose monophosphate cycle to fix formaldehyde and convert it into metabolically useful organic compounds.
0019697	name:Name:L-xylitol catabolic process to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-arabitol and xylitol degradation	name:Synonym:L-xylitol breakdown to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-xylitol degradation to xylulose 5-phosphate	name:Synonym:L-xylitol utilization	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-xylitol to form xylulose 5-phosphate. L-xylitol is converted into L-xylulose, which is then phosphorylated to L-xylulose-5-phosphate. This is converted to D-xylulose-5-phosphate via the intermediate L-ribulose-5-phosphate.
0019748	name:Name:secondary metabolic process	name:Synonym:secondary metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in many of the chemical changes of compounds that are not necessarily required for growth and maintenance of cells, and are often unique to a taxon. In multicellular organisms secondary metabolism is generally carried out in specific cell types, and may be useful for the organism as a whole. In unicellular organisms, secondary metabolism is often used for the production of antibiotics or for the utilization and acquisition of unusual nutrients.
0006582	name:Name:melanin metabolic process	name:Synonym:melanin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving melanins, pigments largely of animal origin. High molecular weight polymers of indole quinone, they are irregular polymeric structures and are divided into three groups: allomelanins in the plant kingdom and eumelanins and phaeomelanins in the animal kingdom.
0006721	name:Name:terpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:terpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving terpenoids, any member of a class of compounds characterized by an isoprenoid chemical structure and including derivatives with various functional groups.
0006714	name:Name:sesquiterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:sesquiterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sesquiterpenoid compounds, terpenoids with three isoprene units.
0006722	name:Name:triterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:triterpene metabolic process	name:Synonym:triterpene metabolism	name:Synonym:triterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving triterpenoid compounds, terpenoids with six isoprene units.
0016098	name:Name:monoterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:monoterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving monoterpenoid compounds, terpenoids having a C10 skeleton.
0016101	name:Name:diterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:diterpene metabolic process	name:Synonym:diterpene metabolism	name:Synonym:diterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving diterpenoid compounds, terpenoids with four isoprene units.
0016108	name:Name:tetraterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetraterpene metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetraterpene metabolism	name:Synonym:tetraterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetraterpenoid compounds, terpenoids with eight isoprene units.
0016111	name:Name:polyterpenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyterpene metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyterpene metabolism	name:Synonym:polyterpenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving polyterpenoid compounds, terpenoids with more than eight isoprene units.
0016114	name:Name:terpenoid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:terpenoid anabolism	name:Synonym:terpenoid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:terpenoid formation	name:Synonym:terpenoid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of terpenoids, any member of a class of compounds characterized by an isoprenoid chemical structure.
0016115	name:Name:terpenoid catabolic process	name:Synonym:terpenoid breakdown	name:Synonym:terpenoid catabolism	name:Synonym:terpenoid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of terpenoids, any member of a class of compounds characterized by an isoprenoid chemical structure.
0016134	name:Name:saponin metabolic process	name:Synonym:saponin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving saponins, glycosides of plants in which the aglycan (sapogenin) group is a terpene or steroid and the sugar group is a glucose, a galactose, a pentose, a methylpentose or an oligosaccharide. Saponins are powerful surfactant agents and membrane active; they are, hence, toxic to animals on injection.
0043288	name:Name:apocarotenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:apocarotenoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving apocarotenoids, a class of compounds derived from the oxidative cleavage of carotenoids, many of which are biologically important e.g. retinal and abscisic acid.
0046447	name:Name:terpenoid indole alkaloid metabolic process	name:Synonym:terpenoid indole alkaloid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving terpenoid indole alkaloids, compounds formed from the condensation of tryptamine (derived from tryptophan) and secologanin (derived from geranyl pyrophosphate).
0009404	name:Name:toxin metabolic process	name:Synonym:toxin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a toxin, a poisonous compound (typically a protein) that is produced by cells or organisms and that can cause disease when introduced into the body or tissues of an organism.
0017143	name:Name:insecticide metabolic process	name:Synonym:insecticide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving insecticides, chemicals used to kill insects.
0030153	name:Name:bacteriocin immunity	info:Definition:A process that mediates resistance to a bacteriocin: any of a heterogeneous group of polypeptide antibiotics that are secreted by certain bacterial strains and are able to kill cells of other susceptible (frequently related) strains after adsorption at specific receptors on the cell surface. They include the colicins, and their mechanisms of action vary.
0043385	name:Name:mycotoxin metabolic process	name:Synonym:mycotoxin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a mycotoxin, any poisonous substance produced by a fungus.
0045460	name:Name:sterigmatocystin metabolic process	name:Synonym:sterigmatocystin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sterigmatocystin, a carcinogenic mycotoxin produced in high yields by strains of the common molds.
0046224	name:Name:bacteriocin metabolic process	name:Synonym:bacteriocin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving bacteriocins, any of a heterogeneous group of polypeptide antibiotics that are secreted by certain bacterial strains and are able to kill cells of other susceptible (frequently related) strains after adsorption at specific receptors on the cell surface. They include the colicins, and their mechanisms of action vary.
0009698	name:Name:phenylpropanoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aromatic derivatives of trans-cinnamic acid.
0009699	name:Name:phenylpropanoid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid anabolism	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid formation	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of aromatic derivatives of trans-cinnamic acid.
0009714	name:Name:chalcone metabolic process	name:Synonym:chalcone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving chalcones, phenyl steryl ketone or its hydroxylated derivatives.
0009801	name:Name:cinnamic acid ester metabolic process	name:Synonym:cinnamic acid ester metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ester derivatives of cinnamic acid, phenylpropenoic acid.
0009803	name:Name:cinnamic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cinnamic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:cinnamylic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cinnamylic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:phenylacrylic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:phenylacrylic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:phenylpropenoic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:phenylpropenoic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cinnamic acid, 3-phenyl-2-propenoic acid.
0009804	name:Name:coumarin metabolic process	name:Synonym:coumarin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving coumarins, compounds derived from the phenylacrylic skeleton of cinnamic acids.
0009806	name:Name:lignan metabolic process	name:Synonym:lignan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lignans, any member of a class of plant metabolites related to lignins. Lignans are usually found as phenylpropanoid dimers in which the phenylpropanoid units are linked tail to tail and thus having a 2,3 dibenzylbutane skeleton, but higher oligomers can also exist.
0009808	name:Name:lignin metabolic process	name:Synonym:lignin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lignins, a class of polymers of phenylpropanoid units.
0009810	name:Name:stilbene metabolic process	name:Synonym:stilbene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving stilbenes, a class of polyketides formed from a molecule of cinnamic acid and three molecules of malonyl-CoA.
0009812	name:Name:flavonoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:flavonoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving flavonoids, a group of water-soluble phenolic derivatives containing a flavan skeleton including flavones, flavonols and flavanoids, and anthocyanins.
0033491	name:Name:coniferin metabolic process	name:Synonym:coniferin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving coniferin, 4-(3-hydroxyprop-1-en-1-yl)-2-methoxyphenyl beta-D-glucopyranoside.
0033494	name:Name:ferulate metabolic process	name:Synonym:ferulate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ferulate, (2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)prop-2-enoate.
0033496	name:Name:sinapate metabolic process	name:Synonym:sinapate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sinapate, (2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)prop-2-enoate.
0033524	name:Name:sinapate ester metabolic process	name:Synonym:sinapate ester metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ester derivatives of sinapate, (2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)prop-2-enoate.
0042854	name:Name:eugenol metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-allyl-2-methoxyphenol metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-allyl-2-methoxyphenol metabolism	name:Synonym:eugenic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:eugenic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:eugenol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving eugenol, a colorless, aromatic, liquid hydrocarbon (C10H12O2) found in clove oil.
0046271	name:Name:phenylpropanoid catabolic process	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid breakdown	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid catabolism	name:Synonym:phenylpropanoid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of aromatic derivatives of trans-cinnamic acid.
0046287	name:Name:isoflavonoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:isoflavonoid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving isoflavonoids, a group of water-soluble phenolic derivatives, isomeric with flavonoids, containing a flavan skeleton. They are differentiated from flavonoids by the point of attachment of the aromatic ring group.
0019757	name:Name:glycosinolate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycosinolate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycosinolates, substituted thioglycosides found in rapeseed products and related cruciferae.
0019758	name:Name:glycosinolate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:glycosinolate anabolism	name:Synonym:glycosinolate biosynthesis	name:Synonym:glycosinolate formation	name:Synonym:glycosinolate synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of glycosinolates, substituted thioglycosides found in rapeseed products and related cruciferae.
0019759	name:Name:glycosinolate catabolic process	name:Synonym:glycosinolate breakdown	name:Synonym:glycosinolate catabolism	name:Synonym:glycosinolate degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of glycosinolates, substituted thioglycosides found in rapeseed products and related cruciferae.
0019760	name:Name:glucosinolate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glucosinolate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glucosinolates, substituted thioglucosides found in rapeseed products and related cruciferae. They are metabolized to a variety of toxic products which are most likely the cause of hepatocytic necrosis in animals and humans.
0042341	name:Name:cyanogenic glycoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyanogenic glycosides, any glycoside containing a cyano group that is released as hydrocyanic acid on acid hydrolysis; such compounds occur in the kernels of various fruits.
0019756	name:Name:cyanogenic glycoside biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside anabolism	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside formation	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cyanogenic glycosides, any glycoside containing a cyano group that is released as hydrocyanic acid on acid hydrolysis; such compounds occur in the kernels of various fruits.
0042342	name:Name:cyanogenic glycoside catabolic process	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside breakdown	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside catabolism	name:Synonym:cyanogenic glycoside degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of cyanogenic glycosides, any glycoside containing a cyano group that is released as hydrocyanic acid on acid hydrolysis; such compounds occur in the kernels of various fruits.
0042810	name:Name:pheromone metabolic process	name:Synonym:pheromone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pheromones, a substance that is secreted and released by an organism and detected by a second organism of the same or a closely related species, in which it causes a specific reaction, such as a definite behavioral reaction or a developmental process.
0046158	name:Name:ocellus pigment metabolic process	name:Synonym:ocellus pigment metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ocellus pigments, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, found or utilized in the ocellus, a minute simple eye found in many invertebrates.
0046152	name:Name:ommochrome metabolic process	name:Synonym:ommochrome metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ommochromes, any of a large group of natural polycyclic pigments commonly found in the Arthropoda, particularly in the ommatidia of the compound eye.
0046217	name:Name:indole phytoalexin metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving indole phytoalexins, any indole compound produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0009700	name:Name:indole phytoalexin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin anabolism	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin formation	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of indole phytoalexins, any indole compound produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0046216	name:Name:indole phytoalexin catabolic process	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin breakdown	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin catabolism	name:Synonym:indole phytoalexin degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of indole phytoalexins, any indole compound produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0052317	name:Name:camalexin metabolic process	name:Synonym:camalexin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving camalexin, an indole phytoalexin.
0046937	name:Name:phytochelatin metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytochelatin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytochelatins, any of a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes. The structure is of the type (gamma-glutamyl-cysteinyl)n-glycine, where n is 2 to 11.
0046938	name:Name:phytochelatin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:phytochelatin anabolism	name:Synonym:phytochelatin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phytochelatin formation	name:Synonym:phytochelatin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of phytochelatins, any of a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes. The structure is of the type (gamma-glutamyl-cysteinyl)n-glycine, where n is 2 to 11.
0042440	name:Name:pigment metabolic process	name:Synonym:pigment metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, e.g. melanin.
0042168	name:Name:heme metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem metabolism	name:Synonym:heme metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring.
0006788	name:Name:heme oxidation	name:Synonym:haem oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the loss of electrons from one or more atoms in heme.
0046156	name:Name:siroheme metabolic process	name:Synonym:sirohaem metabolic process	name:Synonym:sirohaem metabolism	name:Synonym:siroheme metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving siroheme, a tetrahydroporphyrin with adjacent, reduced pyrrole rings.
0046160	name:Name:heme a metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem a metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem a metabolism	name:Synonym:heme a metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme a, a derivative of heme found in cytochrome aa3.
0046162	name:Name:heme c metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem c metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem c metabolism	name:Synonym:heme c metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme c, a derivative of heme found in cytochromes c, b4, and f.
0046492	name:Name:heme b metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem b metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem b metabolism	name:Synonym:heme b metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme b, a Fe(II) porphyrin complex readily isolated from the hemoglobin of beef blood, but also found in other proteins including other hemoglobins, myoglobins, cytochromes P-450, catalases, peroxidases as well as b type cytochromes.
0048033	name:Name:heme o metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem o metabolic process	name:Synonym:haem o metabolism	name:Synonym:heme o metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heme O, a derivative of heme containing a 17-carbon hydroxyethylfarnesyl side chain at position 8 of the tetrapyrrole macrocycle.
0043474	name:Name:pigment metabolic process involved in pigmentation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolic process during pigmentation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolism during pigmentation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, resulting in the deposition or aggregation of pigment in an organism, tissue or cell.
0043324	name:Name:pigment metabolic process involved in developmental pigmentation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolic process during developmental pigmentation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolism during developmental pigmentation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, e.g. melanin, occurring during the deposition of coloring matter in an organ or organism.
0043475	name:Name:pigment metabolic process involved in pigment accumulation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolic process during pigment accumulation	name:Synonym:pigment metabolism during pigment accumulation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a pigment, any general or particular coloring matter in living organisms, as part of the accumulation of pigment.
0046283	name:Name:anthocyanin metabolic process	name:Synonym:anthocyanin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving anthocyanins, any member of a group of intensely colored soluble glycosides of anthocyanidins that occur in plants. They are responsible from most of the scarlet, purple, mauve and blue coloring in higher plants, especially of flowers.
0051550	name:Name:aurone metabolic process	name:Synonym:aurone metabolism	name:Synonym:benzalcoumaran-3-one metabolic process	name:Synonym:benzalcoumaran-3-one metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aurones, a series of plant flavonoids that provide a yellow colour to flowers. They have the basic skeletal structure of two benzene rings joined by a linear C3 chain (C6-C3-C6). Aurones exist mostly as 6-O-glucosides.
0051552	name:Name:flavone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one metabolism	name:Synonym:2-phenylchromone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-phenylchromone metabolism	name:Synonym:flavone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving flavones, a class of pigmented plant compounds based on 2-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (2-phenylchromone).
0033510	name:Name:luteolin metabolic process	name:Synonym:luteolin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving luteolin, 2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-4H-chromen-4-one.
0051554	name:Name:flavonol metabolic process	name:Synonym:flavonol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving flavonols, a member of a class of vascular pigments formed by consecutive oxidative processes from the flavonoid intermediates flavanones and dihydroflavonols. Flavonols are the most widespread of the flavonoids and have a wide array of physiological activities.
0051558	name:Name:phlobaphene metabolic process	name:Synonym:phlobaphene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phlobaphenes, red pigments with oligomeric or polymeric structure derived from the flavonoid intermediate flavan-4-ols.
0042445	name:Name:hormone metabolic process	name:Synonym:hormone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any hormone, naturally occurring substances secreted by specialized cells that affects the metabolism or behavior of other cells possessing functional receptors for the hormone.
0009850	name:Name:auxin metabolic process	name:Synonym:auxin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving auxins, a group of plant hormones that regulate aspects of plant growth.
0009683	name:Name:indoleacetic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:IAA metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole acetic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:indole acetic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:indoleacetic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving indole-3-acetic acid, a compound which functions as a growth regulator in plants.
0010249	name:Name:auxin conjugate metabolic process	name:Synonym:auxin conjugate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving auxin conjugates, a bound form of auxin.
0080024	name:Name:indolebutyric acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:IBA metabolic process	name:Synonym:IBA metabolism	name:Synonym:indole-3-butyric acid metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving indolebutyric acid, a compound that serves as an active or storage form of the hormone indole-3-acetic acid (an auxin) in many plants.
0016131	name:Name:brassinosteroid metabolic process	name:Synonym:brassinosteroid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving brassinosteroids, any of a group of steroid derivatives that occur at very low concentrations in plant tissues and may have hormone-like effects.
0016486	name:Name:peptide hormone processing	info:Definition:The generation of a mature peptide hormone by posttranslational processing of a prohormone.
0002003	name:Name:angiotensin maturation	info:Definition:The process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of angiotensin by conversion of renin substrate into mature angiotensin in the blood.
0030070	name:Name:insulin processing	info:Definition:The formation of mature insulin by proteolysis of the precursor preproinsulin. The signal sequence is first cleaved from preproinsulin to form proinsulin; proinsulin is then cleaved to release the C peptide, leaving the A and B chains of mature insulin linked by disulfide bridges.
0032455	name:Name:nerve growth factor processing	info:Definition:The generation of a mature nerve growth factor by proteolysis of a precursor.
0034230	name:Name:enkephalin processing	name:Synonym:enkephalin formation	name:Synonym:peptide enkephalin formation	name:Synonym:peptide enkephalin processing	info:Definition:The formation of mature enkephalin, a pentapeptide hormone involved in regulating pain and nociception in the body by proteolytic processing of enkephalin propeptide.
0034231	name:Name:islet amyloid polypeptide processing	name:Synonym:IAPP formation	name:Synonym:IAPP processing	name:Synonym:islet amyloid peptide formation	name:Synonym:islet amyloid peptide processing	name:Synonym:islet amyloid polypeptide formation	info:Definition:The formation of mature islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) by posttranslational processing of pro-islet amyloid polypeptide (pro-IAPP).
0034959	name:Name:endothelin maturation	info:Definition:The process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of endothelin by conversion of Big-endothelin substrate into mature endothelin.
0034754	name:Name:cellular hormone metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any hormone, naturally occurring substances secreted by specialized cells that affects the metabolism or behavior of other cells possessing functional receptors for the hormone, as carried out by individual cells.
0006716	name:Name:juvenile hormone metabolic process	name:Synonym:juvenile hormone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving juvenile hormones, the three sesquiterpenoid derivatives that function to maintain the larval state of insects at molting and that may be required for other processes, e.g. oogenesis.
0008207	name:Name:C21-steroid hormone metabolic process	name:Synonym:C21-steroid hormone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving C21-steroid hormones, steroid compounds containing 21 carbons which function as hormones.
0008209	name:Name:androgen metabolic process	name:Synonym:androgen metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving androgens, C19 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of male sexual characteristics.
0008210	name:Name:estrogen metabolic process	name:Synonym:estrogen metabolism	name:Synonym:oestrogen metabolic process	name:Synonym:oestrogen metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving estrogens, C18 steroid hormones that can stimulate the development of female sexual characteristics. Also found in plants.
0030186	name:Name:melatonin metabolic process	name:Synonym:melatonin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine).
0042572	name:Name:retinol metabolic process	name:Synonym:retinol metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 alcohol metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving retinol, one of the three compounds that makes up vitamin A.
0042573	name:Name:retinoic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:retinoic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin A1 acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving retinoic acid, one of the three components that makes up vitamin A.
0045455	name:Name:ecdysteroid metabolic process	name:Synonym:ecdysteroid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ecdysteroids, a group of polyhydroxylated ketosteroids ubiquitous in insects and other arthropods, in which they initiate post-embryonic development, including the metamorphosis of immature forms and the development of the reproductive system and the maturation of oocytes in adult females.
0042403	name:Name:thyroid hormone metabolic process	name:Synonym:thyroid hormone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the compounds secreted by the thyroid gland, largely thyroxine and triiodothyronine.
0006590	name:Name:thyroid hormone generation	info:Definition:The formation of either of the compounds secreted by the thyroid gland, mainly thyroxine and triiodothyronine. This is achieved by the iodination and joining of tyrosine molecules to form the precursor thyroglobin, proteolysis of this precursor gives rise to the thyroid hormones.
0043170	name:Name:macromolecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:biopolymer metabolic process	name:Synonym:macromolecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass.
0005976	name:Name:polysaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycan metabolism	name:Synonym:polysaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving polysaccharides, a polymer of more than 20 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages.
0010383	name:Name:cell wall polysaccharide metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cell wall polysaccharides.
0031221	name:Name:arabinan metabolic process	name:Synonym:arabinan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving arabinan, a branched homopolymer of L-arabinose.
0044042	name:Name:glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:glucan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glucans, polysaccharides consisting only of glucose residues.
0044263	name:Name:multicellular organismal polysaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal glycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal glycan metabolism	name:Synonym:organismal polysaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving polysaccharides, polymers of more than 10 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages, in multicellular organisms that occur at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0044264	name:Name:cellular polysaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular glycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular glycan metabolism	name:Synonym:cellular polysaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving polysaccharides, polymers of more than 10 monosaccharide residues joined by glycosidic linkages, as carried out by individual cells.
0045488	name:Name:pectin metabolic process	name:Synonym:pectin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pectin, a group of galacturonic acid-containing, water-soluble colloidal carbohydrates of high molecular weight and of net negative charge.
0046374	name:Name:teichoic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:teichoic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving teichoic acid, any polymer occurring in the cell wall, membrane or capsule of Gram-positive bacteria and containing chains of glycerol phosphate or ribitol phosphate residues.
0010467	name:Name:gene expression	info:Definition:The process in which a gene's sequence is converted into a mature gene product or products (proteins or RNA). This includes the production of an RNA transcript as well as any processing to produce a mature RNA product or an mRNA (for protein-coding genes) and the translation of that mRNA into protein. Some protein processing events may be included when they are required to form an active form of a product from an inactive precursor form.
0019538	name:Name:protein metabolic process	name:Synonym:protein metabolic process and modification	name:Synonym:protein metabolism	name:Synonym:protein metabolism and modification	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a specific protein, rather than of proteins in general. Includes protein modification.
0006508	name:Name:proteolysis	name:Synonym:ATP-dependent proteolysis	name:Synonym:peptidolysis	info:Definition:The hydrolysis of proteins into smaller polypeptides and/or amino acids by cleavage of their peptide bonds.
0042107	name:Name:cytokine metabolic process	name:Synonym:cytokine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cytokines, any of a group of proteins or glycoproteins that function to control the survival, growth and differentiation of tissues and cells, and which have autocrine and paracrine activity.
0044267	name:Name:cellular protein metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular protein metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a specific protein, rather than of proteins in general, occurring at the level of an individual cell. Includes protein modification.
0044268	name:Name:multicellular organismal protein metabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal protein metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a specific protein, rather than of proteins in general, in multicellular organisms occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0051604	name:Name:protein maturation	info:Definition:Any process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of a protein.
0052418	name:Name:metabolism by organism of protein in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:metabolism by organism of protein in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism involving protein macromolecules within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0072376	name:Name:protein activation cascade	name:Synonym:protein activation pathway	name:Synonym:protein activitory cascade	info:Definition:A response to a stimulus that consists of a sequential series of modifications to a set of proteins where the product of one reaction acts catalytically in the following reaction. The magnitude of the response is typically amplified at each successive step in the cascade. Modifications typically include proteolysis or covalent modification, and may also include binding events.
0020027	name:Name:hemoglobin metabolic process	name:Synonym:haemoglobin metabolic process	name:Synonym:haemoglobin metabolism	name:Synonym:hemoglobin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving hemoglobin, including its uptake and utilization.
0042541	name:Name:hemoglobin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:haemoglobin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:haemoglobin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:hemoglobin anabolism	name:Synonym:hemoglobin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:hemoglobin formation	name:Synonym:hemoglobin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of hemoglobin, an oxygen carrying, conjugated protein containing four heme groups and globin.
0042620	name:Name:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) metabolic process	name:Synonym:PHA metabolic process	name:Synonym:PHA metabolism	name:Synonym:poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates), polyesters of 3-hydroxyacids produced as intracellular granules by a large variety of bacteria.
0043412	name:Name:macromolecule modification	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more monomeric units in a polypeptide, polynucleotide, polysaccharide, or other biological macromolecule, resulting in a change in its properties.
0006304	name:Name:DNA modification	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more nucleotide sites in DNA, resulting in a change in its properties.
0006464	name:Name:protein modification process	name:Synonym:process resulting in protein modification	name:Synonym:protein tagging activity	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more amino acids occurring in proteins, peptides and nascent polypeptides (co-translational, post-translational modifications). Includes the modification of charged tRNAs that are destined to occur in a protein (pre-translation modification).
0009451	name:Name:RNA modification	name:Synonym:RNA editing	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more nucleotides within an RNA molecule to produce an RNA molecule with a sequence that differs from that coded genetically.
0043413	name:Name:macromolecule glycosylation	info:Definition:The covalent attachment of a glycosyl residue to one or more monomeric units in a polypeptide, polynucleotide, polysaccharide, or other biological macromolecule.
0043414	name:Name:macromolecule methylation	info:Definition:The covalent attachment of a methyl residue to one or more monomeric units in a polypeptide, polynucleotide, polysaccharide, or other biological macromolecule.
0044036	name:Name:cell wall macromolecule metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules forming, or destined to form, part of the cell wall. A cell wall is a rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0010382	name:Name:cellular cell wall macromolecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall macromolecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules forming, or destined to form, part of a cell wall. A cell wall is a rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis, occurring at the level of the cell.
0044037	name:Name:multi-organism cell wall macromolecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism cell wall macromolecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules forming, or destined to form, part of a cell wall, involving more than one organism. A cell wall is a rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0044259	name:Name:multicellular organismal macromolecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal macromolecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules, large molecules including proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates, in multicellular organisms occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0032963	name:Name:collagen metabolic process	name:Synonym:collagen metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving collagen, any of a group of fibrous proteins of very high tensile strength that form the main component of connective tissue in animals. Collagen is highly enriched in glycine (some regions are 33% glycine) and proline, occurring predominantly as 3-hydroxyproline (about 20%).
0044261	name:Name:multicellular organismal carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal carbohydrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, in multicellular organisms, occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0044260	name:Name:cellular macromolecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular biopolymer metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass, as carried out by individual cells.
0006259	name:Name:DNA metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular DNA metabolism	name:Synonym:DNA metabolism	info:Definition:Any cellular metabolic process involving deoxyribonucleic acid. This is one of the two main types of nucleic acid, consisting of a long, unbranched macromolecule formed from one, or more commonly, two, strands of linked deoxyribonucleotides.
0009100	name:Name:glycoprotein metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycoprotein metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycoproteins, any protein that contains covalently bound glycose (i.e. monosaccharide) residues; the glycose occurs most commonly as oligosaccharide or fairly small polysaccharide but occasionally as monosaccharide.
0016070	name:Name:RNA metabolic process	name:Synonym:RNA metabolism	info:Definition:The cellular chemical reactions and pathways involving RNA, ribonucleic acid, one of the two main type of nucleic acid, consisting of a long, unbranched macromolecule formed from ribonucleotides joined in 3',5'-phosphodiester linkage.
0042157	name:Name:lipoprotein metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipoprotein metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any conjugated, water-soluble protein in which the nonprotein group consists of a lipid or lipids.
0043112	name:Name:receptor metabolic process	name:Synonym:receptor metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a receptor molecule, a macromolecule that undergoes combination with a hormone, neurotransmitter, drug or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell function.
0070500	name:Name:poly-gamma-glutamate metabolic process	name:Synonym:poly-gamma-glutamate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving poly-gamma-glutamate, a polymer of D- and/or L-glutamic acid residues linked by gamma-peptidyl bonds.
0052229	name:Name:metabolism of macromolecule in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:metabolism of macromolecule in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism involving macromolecules within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052174	name:Name:metabolism by symbiont of host macromolecule	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism involving macromolecules within the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052407	name:Name:metabolism by organism of carbohydrate in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:metabolism by organism of carbohydrate in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism involving carbohydrates within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052416	name:Name:metabolism by host of symbiont macromolecule	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism involving macromolecules within the symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044033	name:Name:multi-organism metabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism metabolism	name:Synonym:multi-organismal metabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organismal metabolism	info:Definition:Any metabolic process - chemical reactions and pathways, including anabolism and catabolism, by which living organisms transform chemical substances - which involves more than one organism.
0035897	name:Name:proteolysis in other organism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism resulting in the hydrolysis of proteins in another organism by cleavage of their peptide bonds.
0044040	name:Name:multi-organism carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:main pathways of carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:main pathways of carbohydrate metabolism	name:Synonym:multi-organism carbohydrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, that involve more than one organism.
0044043	name:Name:multi-organism glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:multi-organism glucan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glucans, polysaccharides consisting only of glucose residues, involving more than one organism.
0052214	name:Name:metabolism of substance in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:metabolism of substance in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism in a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052002	name:Name:metabolism by symbiont of substance in host	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism in its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052419	name:Name:metabolism by host of substance in symbiont	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways performed by an organism in its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044236	name:Name:multicellular organismal metabolic process	name:Synonym:multicellular organismal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways in multicellular organisms that occur at the tissue, organ, or organismal level. These processes, unlike cellular metabolism, can include transport of substances between cells when that transport is required.
0009760	name:Name:C4 photosynthesis	info:Definition:The combination of atmospheric CO2 with a 3-carbon molecule phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) in the mesophyll cells to make a 4-carbon acid which is immediately converted to malic acid. The malic acid is then passed across to the bundle sheath cells where it is broken down again to pyruvic acid and CO2. The acid is passed back to the mesophyll cells to be used again, while the CO2 is fed into the reductive pentose-phosphate cycle (Calvin cycle) and converted into sugar and starch.
0009762	name:Name:NADP-malic enzyme C4 photosynthesis	info:Definition:The process of C4 photosynthesis, as it occurs in plants in which the enzyme decarboxylating C4 acids in the bundle sheath is NADP-malic enzyme.
0009763	name:Name:NAD-malic enzyme C4 photosynthesis	info:Definition:The process of C4 photosynthesis, as it occurs in plants in which the enzyme decarboxylating C4 acids in the bundle sheath is NAD-malic enzyme.
0009764	name:Name:PEP carboxykinase C4 photosynthesis	info:Definition:The process of C4 photosynthesis, as it occurs in plants in which the enzyme decarboxylating C4 acids in the bundle sheath is phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK).
0044243	name:Name:multicellular organismal catabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal breakdown	name:Synonym:organismal catabolism	name:Synonym:organismal degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of substances in multicellular organisms that occur at the tissue, organ, or organismal level. These processes, unlike cellular metabolism, can include transport of substances between cells when that transport is required.
0030574	name:Name:collagen catabolic process	name:Synonym:collagen breakdown	name:Synonym:collagen catabolism	name:Synonym:collagen degradation	info:Definition:The proteolytic chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of collagen in the extracellular matrix, usually carried out by proteases secreted by nearby cells.
0044254	name:Name:multicellular organismal protein catabolic process	name:Synonym:organismal protein breakdown	name:Synonym:organismal protein catabolism	name:Synonym:organismal protein degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a protein in a multicellular organism, occurring at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0044237	name:Name:cellular metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular metabolism	name:Synonym:intermediary metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which individual cells transform chemical substances.
0001887	name:Name:selenium compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:selenium compound metabolism	name:Synonym:selenium metabolic process	name:Synonym:selenium metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving compounds that contain selenium, such as selenocysteine.
0016259	name:Name:selenocysteine metabolic process	name:Synonym:selenocysteine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving selenocysteine, an essential component of glutathione peroxidase and some other proteins.
0070329	name:Name:tRNA seleno-modification	name:Synonym:tRNA base modification to selenouridine	info:Definition:The substitution of a selenium atom for a sulfur atom in a ribonucleotide in a tRNA molecule.
0070503	name:Name:selenium-containing prosthetic group metabolic process	name:Synonym:selenium-containing prosthetic group metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a prosthetic group that contains selenium, as in the selenium-dependent molybdenum hydroxylases. The selenium atom in the prosthetic group is required for enzymatic function but is labile to a variety of treatments.
0006081	name:Name:cellular aldehyde metabolic process	name:Synonym:aldehyde metabolism	name:Synonym:alkanal metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkanal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aldehydes, any organic compound with the formula R-CH=O, as carried out by individual cells.
0006117	name:Name:acetaldehyde metabolic process	name:Synonym:acetaldehyde metabolism	name:Synonym:ethanal metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethanal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acetaldehyde, a colorless, flammable liquid intermediate in the metabolism of alcohol.
0009438	name:Name:methylglyoxal metabolic process	name:Synonym:methylglyoxal bypass	name:Synonym:methylglyoxal metabolism	name:Synonym:methylglyoxal pathway	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methylglyoxal, CH3-CO-CHO, the aldehyde of pyruvic acid.
0018982	name:Name:vanillin metabolic process	name:Synonym:vanillic aldehyde metabolic process	name:Synonym:vanillic aldehyde metabolism	name:Synonym:vanillin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving vanillin, an aromatic hydrocarbon which occurs naturally in black vanilla bean pods and can be obtained as a by-product of the pulp and paper industry by the oxidative breakdown of lignin.
0033859	name:Name:furaldehyde metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving furaldehyde, a furan ring-containing aldehyde compound which can be formed from the thermal decomposition of biomass.
0042574	name:Name:retinal metabolic process	name:Synonym:retinal metabolism	name:Synonym:retinaldehyde metabolic process	name:Synonym:retinaldehyde metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving retinal, a compound that plays an important role in the visual process in most vertebrates. In the retina, retinal combines with opsins to form visual pigments. Retinal is one of the forms of vitamin A.
0042817	name:Name:pyridoxal metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyridoxal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 3-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methyl-4-pyridinecarboxaldehyde, one of the vitamin B6 compounds. Pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine are collectively known as vitamin B6, and are efficiently converted to the biologically active form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal phosphate.
0046292	name:Name:formaldehyde metabolic process	name:Synonym:formaldehyde metabolism	name:Synonym:methanal metabolic process	name:Synonym:methanal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving formaldehyde (methanal, H2C=O), a colorless liquid or gas with a pungent odor, commonly used as a fixative or an antibacterial agent.
0046458	name:Name:hexadecanal metabolic process	name:Synonym:hexadecanal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving hexadecanal, the C16 straight chain aldehyde.
0046487	name:Name:glyoxylate metabolic process	name:Synonym:glyoxylate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glyoxylate, the anion of glyoxylic acid, HOC-COOH.
0006082	name:Name:organic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:organic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organic acids, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage.
0018892	name:Name:cyclohexylsulfamate metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyclohexylsulfamate metabolism	name:Synonym:cyclohexylsulphamate metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyclohexylsulphamate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyclohexylsulfamate, also known as cyclamic acid. Sodium cyclohexylsulfamate (CHS-Na) was a widely used sweetening agent but was banned because of the suspicion of carcinogenicity and metabolic conversion to cyclohexylamine (CHA), a toxic substance. It is now used as a fungicide.
0018926	name:Name:methanesulfonic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:methanesulfonic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:methanesulphonic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:methanesulphonic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methanesulfonic acid, a strong acid produced by the oxidation of dimethyl sulfide.
0018969	name:Name:thiocyanate metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiocyanate metabolism	name:Synonym:thiocyanic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:thiocyanic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving thiocyanate, the anion of thiocyanic acid, a toxic cyanide derivative commonly formed as a by-product in the production of gas for fuel, coke, and substances for chemical industries.
0018972	name:Name:toluene-4-sulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-methylbenzenesulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-methylbenzenesulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:4-toluenesulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-toluenesulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:toluene-4-sulphonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving toluene-4-sulfonate, the anion of 4-toluene sulfonic acid, a white crystalline solid which is highly hygroscopic and soluble in water.
0031388	name:Name:organic acid phosphorylation	info:Definition:The process of introducing one or more phosphate groups into an organic acid.
0043436	name:Name:oxoacid metabolic process	name:Synonym:keto acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:keto acid metabolism	name:Synonym:ketoacid metabolic process	name:Synonym:ketoacid metabolism	name:Synonym:oxo acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxo acid metabolism	name:Synonym:oxoacid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any oxoacid; an oxoacid is a compound which contains oxygen, at least one other element, and at least one hydrogen bound to oxygen, and which produces a conjugate base by loss of positive hydrogen ion(s) (hydrons).
0050846	name:Name:teichuronic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:teichuronic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving teichuronic acid, a polymer containing chains of uronic acids and N-acetylglucosamine found in the cell wall, membrane or capsule of Gram-positive bacteria.
0006091	name:Name:generation of precursor metabolites and energy	name:Synonym:energy pathways	name:Synonym:intermediary metabolism	name:Synonym:metabolic energy generation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of precursor metabolites, substances from which energy is derived, and any process involved in the liberation of energy from these substances.
0006096	name:Name:glycolysis	name:Synonym:anaerobic glycolysis	name:Synonym:Embden-Meyerhof pathway	name:Synonym:Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway	name:Synonym:modifed Embden-Meyerhof pathway	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a monosaccharide (generally glucose) into pyruvate, with the concomitant production of a small amount of ATP. Glycolysis begins with phosphorylation of a monosaccharide (generally glucose) on the sixth carbon by a hexokinase, and ends with the production of pyruvate. Pyruvate may be converted to ethanol, lactate, or other small molecules, or fed into the TCA cycle.
0006119	name:Name:oxidative phosphorylation	name:Synonym:respiratory-chain phosphorylation	info:Definition:The phosphorylation of ADP to ATP that accompanies the oxidation of a metabolite through the operation of the respiratory chain. Oxidation of compounds establishes a proton gradient across the membrane, providing the energy for ATP synthesis.
0009765	name:Name:photosynthesis, light harvesting	name:Synonym:energy dissipation	info:Definition:Absorption and transfer of the energy absorbed from light photons between photosystem reaction centers.
0015975	name:Name:energy derivation by oxidation of reduced inorganic compounds	name:Synonym:chemolithotrophie	name:Synonym:chemolithotrophy	name:Synonym:lithotrophy	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which a cell derives energy from inorganic compounds; results in the oxidation of the compounds from which energy is released.
0015980	name:Name:energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds	name:Synonym:chemoorganotrophy	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which a cell derives energy from organic compounds; results in the oxidation of the compounds from which energy is released.
0019684	name:Name:photosynthesis, light reaction	name:Synonym:photolysis	info:Definition:The light reactions of photosynthesis, which take place in photosystems II and I. Light energy is harvested and used to power the transfer of electrons among a series of electron donors and acceptors. The final electron acceptor is NADP+, which is reduced to NADPH. NADPH generated from light reactions is used in sugar synthesis in dark reactions. Light reactions also generate a proton motive force across the thylakoid membrane, and the proton gradient is used to synthesize ATP. There are two chemical reactions involved in the light reactions: water oxidation in photosystem II, and NADP reduction in photosystem I.
0022900	name:Name:electron transport chain	info:Definition:A process in which a series of electron carriers operate together to transfer electrons from donors to any of several different terminal electron acceptors to generate a transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
0006518	name:Name:peptide metabolic process	name:Synonym:peptide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving peptides, compounds of two or more amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another.
0006465	name:Name:signal peptide processing	name:Synonym:leader peptide processing	info:Definition:The proteolytic removal of a signal peptide from a protein during or after transport to a specific location in the cell.
0006749	name:Name:glutathione metabolic process	name:Synonym:glutathione metabolism	name:Synonym:oxidized glutathione reduction	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glutathione, the tripeptide glutamylcysteinylglycine, which acts as a coenzyme for some enzymes and as an antioxidant in the protection of sulfhydryl groups in enzymes and other proteins; it has a specific role in the reduction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and oxidized ascorbate, and it participates in the gamma-glutamyl cycle.
0030650	name:Name:peptide antibiotic metabolic process	name:Synonym:peptide antibiotic metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving peptides with antibiotic activity.
0031179	name:Name:peptide modification	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more amino acid residues within a peptide, resulting in a change in the properties of that peptide.
0050761	name:Name:depsipeptide metabolic process	name:Synonym:depsipeptide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving depsipeptides, a linear or cyclic compound composed of both amino acids and hydroxy acids in peptide and ester bonds respectively.
0050822	name:Name:peptide stabilization	name:Synonym:peptide stabilization activity	info:Definition:Any process involved in maintaining the structure and integrity of a peptide and preventing it from being degraded.
0006725	name:Name:cellular aromatic compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:aromatic compound metabolism	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon metabolic process	name:Synonym:aromatic hydrocarbon metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aromatic compounds, any organic compound characterized by one or more planar rings, each of which contains conjugated double bonds and delocalized pi electrons, as carried out by individual cells.
0009072	name:Name:aromatic amino acid family metabolic process	name:Synonym:aromatic amino acid family metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aromatic amino acid family, amino acids with aromatic ring (phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan).
0009112	name:Name:nucleobase metabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleobase metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a nucleobase, a nitrogenous base that is a constituent of a nucleic acid, e.g. the purines: adenine, guanine, hypoxanthine, xanthine and the pyrimidines: cytosine, uracil, thymine.
0009238	name:Name:enterobactin metabolic process	name:Synonym:enterobactin metabolism	name:Synonym:enterochelin metabolic process	name:Synonym:enterochelin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving enterobactin, a catechol-derived siderochrome of Enterobacteria; enterobactin (N',N',N''-(2,6,10-trioxo-1,5,9-triacyclodecane-3,7,11-triyl)tris(2,3-dihydroxy)benzamide) is a self-triester of 2,3-dihydroxy-N-benzoyl-L-serine and a product of the shikimate pathway.
0009696	name:Name:salicylic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:salicylic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving of salicylic acid (2-hydroxybenzoic acid), a derivative of benzoic acid.
0018924	name:Name:mandelate metabolic process	name:Synonym:mandelate metabolism	name:Synonym:mandelic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:mandelic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mandelate, the anion of mandelic acid. Mandelic acid (alpha-hydroxybenzeneacetic acid) is an 8-carbon alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) that is used in organic chemistry and as a urinary antiseptic.
0019434	name:Name:sophorosyloxydocosanoate metabolic process	name:Synonym:sophorosyloxydocosanoate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sophorosyloxydocosanoate, 13-sophorosyloxydocosanoate 6',6''-diacetate, an aromatic hydrocarbon.
0019507	name:Name:pyridine metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyridine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pyridine, a nitrogenous base (C5H5N) obtained from the distillation of bone oil or coal tar, and by the decomposition of certain alkaloids, as a colorless liquid with a peculiar pungent odor.
0031147	name:Name:1-(3,5-dichloro-2,6-dihydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)hexan-1-one metabolic process	name:Synonym:1-(3,5-dichloro-2,6-dihydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)hexan-1-one metabolism	name:Synonym:DIF-1 metabolic process	name:Synonym:DIF-1 metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 1-(3,5-dichloro-2,6-dihydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)hexan-1-one, also known as DIF-1, differentiation-inducing factor-1. DIF-1 is a secreted chlorinated molecule that controls cell fate during development of Dictyostelium cells.
0042537	name:Name:benzene-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:benzene and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:benzene and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:benzene-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving benzene, C6H6, a volatile, very inflammable liquid, contained in the naphtha produced by the destructive distillation of coal, from which it is separated by fractional distillation, or any of its derivatives.
0046501	name:Name:protoporphyrinogen IX metabolic process	name:Synonym:protoporphyrinogen IX metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving protoporphyrinogen IX, the specific substrate for the enzyme ferrochelatase, which catalyzes the insertion of iron to form protoheme. It is probably also the substrate for chlorophyll formation.
0046502	name:Name:uroporphyrinogen III metabolic process	name:Synonym:uroporphyrinogen III metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving uroporphyrinogen III, a precursor for synthesis of vitamin B12, chlorophyll, and heme in organisms that produce these compounds.
0006730	name:Name:one-carbon metabolic process	name:Synonym:one carbon metabolic process	name:Synonym:one carbon metabolism	name:Synonym:one-carbon metabolism	name:Synonym:one-carbon transfer metabolic process	name:Synonym:one-carbon transfer metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving the transfer of one-carbon units in various oxidation states.
0019496	name:Name:serine-isocitrate lyase pathway	info:Definition:A one-carbon metabolic process in which acetyl-CoA is produced from formaldehyde and carbon dioxide.
0032259	name:Name:methylation	info:Definition:The process in which a methyl group is covalently attached to a molecule.
0070988	name:Name:demethylation	info:Definition:The process of removing one or more methyl groups from a molecule.
0006790	name:Name:sulfur compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulfur metabolism	name:Synonym:sulphur metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulphur metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving the nonmetallic element sulfur or compounds that contain sulfur, such as the amino acids methionine and cysteine or the tripeptide glutathione.
0000096	name:Name:sulfur amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulfur amino acid metabolism	name:Synonym:sulphur amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulphur amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids containing sulfur, comprising cysteine, homocysteine, methionine and selenocysteine.
0000103	name:Name:sulfate assimilation	name:Synonym:sulfate assimilation, phosphoadenylyl sulfate reduction by an oxidoreductase, acting on sulfur group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	name:Synonym:sulphate assimilation	name:Synonym:sulphate assimilation, phosphoadenylyl sulphate reduction by an oxidoreductase, acting on sulphur group of donors, NAD or NADP as acceptor	info:Definition:The pathways by which inorganic sulfate is processed and incorporated into sulfated compounds.
0006768	name:Name:biotin metabolic process	name:Synonym:biotin metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin B7 metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B7 metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin H metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin H metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving biotin, cis-tetrahydro-2-oxothieno(3,4-d)imidazoline-4-valeric acid; the (+) enantiomer is very widely distributed in cells and serves as a carrier in a number of enzymatic beta-carboxylation reactions.
0009106	name:Name:lipoate metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipoate metabolism	name:Synonym:lipoic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipoic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lipoate, 1,2-dithiolane-3-pentanoate, the anion derived from lipoic acid.
0010126	name:Name:mycothiol metabolic process	name:Synonym:mycothiol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mycothiol, which consists of N-acetyl-L-cysteine linked to a pseudodisaccharide, D-glucosamine and myo-inositol. Mycothiol is produced in actinomycetes like mycobacteria and serves similar functions to glutathione.
0016143	name:Name:S-glycoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:S-glycoside metabolism	name:Synonym:thioglycoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:thioglycoside metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving S-glycosides, any compound in which a glycosyl group has been substituted into a thiol group.
0018895	name:Name:dibenzothiophene metabolic process	name:Synonym:dibenzothiophene metabolism	name:Synonym:diphenylene sulfide metabolic process	name:Synonym:diphenylene sulfide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dibenzothiophene, a substance composed of two benzene rings linked by one sulfide bond and one carbon-carbon bond. Dibenzothiophene derivatives can be detected in diesel oil following hydrodesulfurization treatment to remove sulfur compounds that would otherwise generate sulfur oxides during combustion.
0018907	name:Name:dimethyl sulfoxide metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethyl sulfoxide metabolism	name:Synonym:dimethyl sulphoxide metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethyl sulphoxide metabolism	name:Synonym:DMSO metabolic process	name:Synonym:DMSO metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO (C2H6OS), an alkyl sulfoxide that is practically odorless in its purified form. As a highly polar organic liquid, it is a powerful solvent. Its biological activities include the ability to penetrate plant and animal tissues and to preserve living cells during freezing.
0018908	name:Name:organosulfide cycle	name:Synonym:organosulphide cycle	info:Definition:A cyclic series of interconversions involving dimethyl sulfide, methanethiol and hydrogen sulfide. Dimethylsulfoxide can also be converted to dimethyl sulfide, which enters the cycle.
0018909	name:Name:dodecyl sulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dodecyl sulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:dodecyl sulphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:dodecyl sulphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dodecyl sulfate, commonly found as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), a component of a variety of synthetic surfactants.
0018984	name:Name:naphthalenesulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:naphthalenesulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:naphthalenesulphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:naphthalenesulphonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving naphthalenesulfonate, sulfonated derivatives of naphthalene.
0019416	name:Name:polythionate oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of thiosulfate to tetrathionate, using cytochrome c as an electron acceptor.
0019417	name:Name:sulfur oxidation	name:Synonym:sulphur oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting the addition of oxygen to elemental sulfur.
0019418	name:Name:sulfide oxidation	name:Synonym:sulphide oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of sulfide to elemental sulfur in a higher oxidation state, or to sulfite or sulfate.
0019419	name:Name:sulfate reduction	name:Synonym:assimilatory sulfate reduction	name:Synonym:assimilatory sulphate reduction	name:Synonym:sulfate reduction, APS pathway	name:Synonym:sulphate reduction	name:Synonym:sulphate reduction, APS pathway	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the reduction of sulfate to another sulfur-containing ion or compound such as hydrogen sulfide, adenosine-phosphosulfate (APS) or thiosulfate.
0019422	name:Name:disproportionation of elemental sulfur	name:Synonym:disproportionation of elemental sulphur	info:Definition:The process in which sulfur compounds with an intermediate oxidation state serve as both electron donors and electron acceptors in an energy-generating redox process. The reaction takes place anaerobically, in light and in the absence of CO2.
0019530	name:Name:taurine metabolic process	name:Synonym:taurine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving taurine (2-aminoethanesulfonic acid), a sulphur-containing amino acid derivative important in the metabolism of fats.
0019694	name:Name:alkanesulfonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkanesulfonate metabolism	name:Synonym:alkanesulphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkanesulphonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alkanesulfonates, the anion of alkanesulfonic acids, sulfonic acid derivatives containing an aliphatic hydrocarbon group.
0030201	name:Name:heparan sulfate proteoglycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:heparan sulfate proteoglycan metabolism	name:Synonym:heparan sulphate proteoglycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:heparan sulphate proteoglycan metabolism	name:Synonym:heparin proteoglycan metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any proteoglycan containing heparan sulfate, any member of a group of glycosaminoglycans that have repeat units consisting of alternating alpha1->4 linked hexuronic acid and glucosamine residues, the former being a mixture of sulfated and nonsulfated D-glucuronic and L-iduronic acids, and the latter being either sulfated or acetylated on its amino group as well as sulfated on one of its hydroxyl groups.
0030202	name:Name:heparin metabolic process	name:Synonym:heparan sulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:heparin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heparin, any member of a group of glycosaminoglycans found mainly as an intracellular component of mast cells. They are similar to heparan sulfates but are of somewhat higher average Mr (6000-20000) and contain fewer N-acetyl groups and more N-sulfate and O-sulfate groups; they may be attached in the same manner to protein, forming proteoglycans. They consist predominantly of alternating alpha1->4-linked D-galactose and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine-6-sulfate residues.
0030204	name:Name:chondroitin sulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving chondroitin sulfate, any member of a group of 10-60 kDa glycosaminoglycans, widely distributed in cartilage and other mammalian connective tissues, the repeat units of which consist of beta-(1,4)-linked D-glucuronyl beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine sulfate. They usually occur linked to a protein to form proteoglycans. Two subgroups exist, one in which the sulfate is on the 4-position (chondroitin sulfate A) and the second in which it is in the 6-position (chondroitin sulfate C). They often are polydisperse and often differ in the degree of sulfation from tissue to tissue. The chains of repeating disaccharide are covalently linked to the side chains of serine residues in the polypeptide backbone of a protein by a glycosidic attachment through the trisaccharide unit galactosyl-galactosyl-xylosyl. Chondroitin sulfate B is more usually known as dermatan sulfate.
0031162	name:Name:sulfur incorporation into metallo-sulfur cluster	name:Synonym:sulphur incorporation into metallo-sulphur cluster	info:Definition:The incorporation of exogenous sulfur into a metallo-sulfur cluster.
0033477	name:Name:S-methylmethionine metabolic process	name:Synonym:S-methylmethionine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving S-methyl-methionine (SMM). SMM can be converted to methionine by donating a methyl group to homocysteine, and concurrent operation of this reaction and that mediated by MMT sets up the SMM cycle.
0042316	name:Name:penicillin metabolic process	name:Synonym:penicillin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any antibiotic that contains the condensed beta-lactamthiazolidine ring system. Penicillins are produced naturally during the growth of various microfungi of the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus.
0042339	name:Name:keratan sulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:keratan sulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:keratan sulphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:keratan sulphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving keratan sulfate, a glycosaminoglycan with repeat units consisting of beta-1,4-linked D-galactopyranosyl-beta-(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulfate and with variable amounts of fucose, sialic acid and mannose units; keratan sulfate chains are covalently linked by a glycosidic attachment through the trisaccharide galactosyl-galactosyl-xylose to peptidyl-threonine or serine residues.
0043645	name:Name:cephalosporin metabolic process	name:Synonym:cephalosporin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cephalosporin, any of large class of tetracyclic triterpene broad-spectrum antibiotics similar both chemically and in their mode of action to penicillin, first isolated from the culture filtrates of mediterranean fungus acremonium (cephalosporium acremonium), and effective against gram-positive bacteria.
0046500	name:Name:S-adenosylmethionine metabolic process	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine metabolic process	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine metabolism	name:Synonym:S-adenosylmethionine metabolism	name:Synonym:SAM metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving S-adenosylmethionine, S-(5'-adenosyl)-L-methionine, an important intermediate in one-carbon metabolism.
0046505	name:Name:sulfolipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulfolipid metabolism	name:Synonym:sulpholipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:sulpholipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sulfolipids, any compound containing a sulfonic acid residue joined by a carbon-sulfur bond to a lipid.
0050427	name:Name:3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulphate metabolism	name:Synonym:3'-phosphoadenylyl-sulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:3'-phosphoadenylyl-sulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:adenosine 3'-phosphate 5'-phosphosulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:adenosine 3'-phosphate 5'-phosphosulfate metabolism	name:Synonym:PAPS metabolic process	name:Synonym:PAPS metabolism	name:Synonym:phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate metabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate, a naturally occurring mixed anhydride. It is an intermediate in the formation of a variety of sulfo compounds in biological systems.
0050654	name:Name:chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan metabolism	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan metabolic process	name:Synonym:chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, any glycoprotein whose glycosaminoglycan units are chondroitin sulfate. Chondroitin sulfates are a group of 10-60 kDa glycosaminoglycans, widely distributed in cartilage and other mammalian connective tissues; the repeat units consist of beta-(1,4)-linked D-glucuronyl beta-(1,3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine sulfate.
0051923	name:Name:sulfation	name:Synonym:phase II metabolism	name:Synonym:sulfonation	name:Synonym:sulfur addition	name:Synonym:sulphation	name:Synonym:sulphur addition	info:Definition:The addition of a sulfate group to a molecule.
0070813	name:Name:hydrogen sulfide metabolic process	name:Synonym:hydrogen sulfide metabolism	name:Synonym:hydrogen sulphide metabolic process	name:Synonym:hydrogen sulphide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving hydrogen sulfide, H2S.
0071792	name:Name:bacillithiol metabolic process	name:Synonym:bacillithiol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving bacillithiol, the alpha-anomeric glycoside of L-cysteinyl-D-glucosamine with L-malic acid. Bacillithiol, produced widely in the Firmicutes and sporadically in other bacterial lineages, is a low-molecular-weight thiol analogous to mycothiol in the Actinomycetes and glutathione in many species.
0006793	name:Name:phosphorus metabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphorus metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving the nonmetallic element phosphorus or compounds that contain phosphorus, usually in the form of a phosphate group (PO4).
0006796	name:Name:phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving the phosphate group, the anion or salt of any phosphoric acid.
0019634	name:Name:phosphonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:phosphonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving of phosphonates, any organic compound containing one or more C-PO(OH)2 or C-PO(OR)2 (with R=alkyl, aryl) groups. Metabolism of phosphonic acid itself, an inorganic compound without the biochemically relevant C-P bond, is not included.
0006805	name:Name:xenobiotic metabolic process	name:Synonym:xenobiotic metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a xenobiotic compound, a compound foreign to living organisms. Used of chemical compounds, e.g. a xenobiotic chemical, such as a pesticide.
0018864	name:Name:acetylene metabolic process	name:Synonym:acetylene metabolism	name:Synonym:ethyne metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethyne metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acetylene, formula CH2CH2, the simplest of the alkynes.
0018866	name:Name:adamantanone metabolic process	name:Synonym:adamantanone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving adamantanone, tricyclo(3.3.1.13,7)decanone, a white crystalline solid used as an intermediate for microelectronics in the production of photoresists.
0018872	name:Name:arsonoacetate metabolic process	name:Synonym:arsonoacetate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving arsonoacetate, a synthetic, organic compound containing a single arsenic atom. Arsonoacetate and other arsenic containing compounds are used in agricultural applications as animal feed additives, cotton defoliants and post-emergence grass herbicides.
0018883	name:Name:caprolactam metabolic process	name:Synonym:caprolactam metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving caprolactam, hexahydro-2h-azepin-2-one, a cyclic amide of caproic acid used in manufacture of synthetic fibers of the polyamide type. It can cause local irritation.
0018891	name:Name:cyclohexanol metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyclohexanol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cyclohexanol, the monohydroxy derivative of cyclohexane. It is used as a solvent and blending agent.
0018905	name:Name:dimethyl ether metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethyl ether metabolism	name:Synonym:methyl ether metabolic process	name:Synonym:methyl ether metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dimethyl ether, CH3-O-CH3, the simplest ether. Dimethyl ether, also known wood ether and methyl ether, is a colorless gas that has been used in refrigeration applications.
0018906	name:Name:methyl tert-butyl ether metabolic process	name:Synonym:methyl tert-butyl ether metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methyl tert-butyl ether, 2-methoxy-2-methylpropane. Methyl tert-butyl ether is a synthetic chemical which is mixed with gasoline for use in reformulated gasoline. It was first introduced as an additive for unleaded gasoline in the 1980s. It is also used as a laboratory reagent and a pharmaceutical agent.
0018928	name:Name:methyl ethyl ketone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-butanone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-butanone metabolism	name:Synonym:MEK metabolic process	name:Synonym:MEK metabolism	name:Synonym:methyl ethyl ketone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methyl ethyl ketone, a clear, colorless liquid with a fragrant, mint-like odor. It is used as a solvent and in making plastics, textiles and paints.
0018939	name:Name:n-octane metabolic process	name:Synonym:n-octane metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving n-octane, the 8 carbon straight chain alkane used in organic syntheses, calibrations, and azeotropic distillations. It is a common component of gasoline and other petroleum products and the engine fuel antiknocking properties of an isomer of n-octane are used as a comparative standard in the Octane Rating System.
0018945	name:Name:organosilicon metabolic process	name:Synonym:organosilicon metabolism	name:Synonym:organosilicone metabolic process	name:Synonym:organosilicone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any organosilicon, organic compounds that contain silicon, a nonmetal element analogous to carbon.
0018964	name:Name:propylene metabolic process	name:Synonym:propylene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving propylene, an alkene produced by catalytic or thermal cracking of hydrocarbons or as a by-product of petroleum refining. It is used mainly in the preparation of alkylates for gasoline and in the production of polypropylene, acrylonitrile, propylene oxide and a number of other industrial chemicals.
0018968	name:Name:tetrahydrofuran metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrahydrofuran metabolism	name:Synonym:THF metabolic process	name:Synonym:THF metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrahydrofuran, a cyclic 4 carbon ether. It is one of the most polar ethers and is a widely used solvent for polar reagents. Since THF is very soluble in water and has a relatively low boiling point, significant amounts are often released into the environment, causing contamination problems.
0018981	name:Name:triethanolamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:triethanolamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving triethanolamine, a combustible, hygroscopic, colorless liquid commonly used in dry-cleaning solutions, cosmetics, detergents, textile processing, wool scouring, and as a corrosion inhibitor and pharmaceutical alkalizing agent.
0042197	name:Name:halogenated hydrocarbon metabolic process	name:Synonym:halogenated hydrocarbon metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving halogenated hydrocarbons, any hydrocarbon with one or more halogen atoms attached to it. Halogens include fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine.
0042198	name:Name:nylon metabolic process	name:Synonym:nylon metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nylon, a polymer where the main polymer chain comprises recurring amide groups; these compounds are generally formed from combinations of diamines, diacids and amino acids.
0052697	name:Name:xenobiotic glucuronidation	name:Synonym:phase II metabolism	info:Definition:The modification of a xenobiotic substance by the conjugation of glucuronic acid. The resultant glucuronosides are often much more water-soluble than the xenobiotic precursor, enabling efficient excretion.
0008218	name:Name:bioluminescence	info:Definition:The production of light by certain enzyme-catalyzed reactions in cells.
0010191	name:Name:mucilage metabolic process	name:Synonym:mucilage metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mucilage, a gelatinous substance secreted by plants.
0048359	name:Name:mucilage metabolic process involved seed coat development	name:Synonym:mucilage metabolic process during seed coat development	name:Synonym:mucilage metabolism during seed coat development	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mucilage that occur as part of seed coat development; mucilage is normally synthesized during seed coat development.
0048360	name:Name:root cap mucilage metabolic process	name:Synonym:root cap mucilage metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mucilage that occur in the root cap; mucilage is normally synthesized during root growth.
0048361	name:Name:root epithelial mucilage metabolic process	name:Synonym:root epithelial mucilage metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mucilage that occur in the root epithelium; mucilage is normally synthesized during root growth.
0048362	name:Name:pedicel mucilage metabolic process	name:Synonym:pedicel mucilage metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mucilage that occur in the flower stem.
0015979	name:Name:photosynthesis	info:Definition:The synthesis by organisms of organic chemical compounds, especially carbohydrates, from carbon dioxide (CO2) using energy obtained from light rather than from the oxidation of chemical compounds.
0017144	name:Name:drug metabolic process	name:Synonym:drug metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a drug, a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease; as used here antibiotic substances (see antibiotic metabolism) are considered to be drugs, even if not used in medical or veterinary practice.
0016999	name:Name:antibiotic metabolic process	name:Synonym:antibiotic metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an antibiotic, a substance produced by or derived from certain fungi, bacteria, and other organisms, that can destroy or inhibit the growth of other microorganisms.
0050783	name:Name:cocaine metabolic process	name:Synonym:cocaine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving cocaine, an alkaloid obtained from the dried leaves of the shrub Erythroxylon coca. It is a cerebral stimulant and narcotic.
0018942	name:Name:organometal metabolic process	name:Synonym:organometal metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organometals, any metal-containing organic compound, especially one in which the metal atom is linked directly to one of more carbon atoms.
0018941	name:Name:organomercury metabolic process	name:Synonym:organomercury metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organomercury compound, any organic compound containing a mercury atom.
0018943	name:Name:organotin metabolic process	name:Synonym:organotin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organotin, an organic compound containing a tin atom.
0035383	name:Name:thioester metabolic process	name:Synonym:thioester metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a thioester, a compound of general formula RC(=O)SR' in which the linking oxygen in an ester is replaced by a sulfur atom. They are the product of esterification between a carboxylic acid and a thiol.
0006637	name:Name:acyl-CoA metabolic process	name:Synonym:acyl-CoA metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acyl-CoA, any derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is in thiolester linkage with an acyl group.
0042133	name:Name:neurotransmitter metabolic process	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving neurotransmitters, any of a group of substances that are released on excitation from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell.
0008291	name:Name:acetylcholine metabolic process	name:Synonym:acetylcholine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acetylcholine, the acetic acid ester of the organic base choline. Acetylcholine is a major neurotransmitter and neuromodulator both in the central and peripheral nervous systems. It also acts as a paracrine signal in various non-neural tissues.
0042443	name:Name:phenylethylamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:phenylethylamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phenylethylamine, an amine with pharmacological properties similar to those of amphetamine, occurs naturally as a neurotransmitter in the brain, and is present in chocolate and oil of bitter almonds.
0046333	name:Name:octopamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:octopamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving octopamine, 1-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-2-aminoethanol. The D enantiomer is about one-tenth as active as norepinephrine and is found in the salivary glands of Octopus and Eledone species.
0042180	name:Name:cellular ketone metabolic process	name:Synonym:ketone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of a class of organic compounds that contain the carbonyl group, CO, and in which the carbonyl group is bonded only to carbon atoms, as carried out by individual cells. The general formula for a ketone is RCOR, where R and R are alkyl or aryl groups.
0006743	name:Name:ubiquinone metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q metabolism	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q6 metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme Q6 metabolism	name:Synonym:ubiquinone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ubiquinone, a lipid-soluble electron-transporting coenzyme.
0018882	name:Name:(+)-camphor metabolic process	name:Synonym:(+)-camphor metabolism	name:Synonym:camphor metabolic process	name:Synonym:camphor metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving (+)-camphor, a bicyclic monoterpene ketone which is one of the major components in the leaves of common sage. Camphor exists in two enantiomers, but the (+)-isomer is more widely distributed.
0042373	name:Name:vitamin K metabolic process	name:Synonym:naphthoquinone metabolic process	name:Synonym:naphthoquinone metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin K metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the forms of vitamin K, quinone-derived vitamins which are involved in the synthesis of blood-clotting factors in mammals. Vitamin K substances share a methylated naphthoquinone ring structure and vary in the aliphatic side chains attached to the molecule.
0043443	name:Name:acetone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-propanone metabolic process	name:Synonym:2-propanone metabolism	name:Synonym:acetone metabolism	name:Synonym:dimethyl ketone metabolic process	name:Synonym:dimethyl ketone metabolism	name:Synonym:propan-2-one metabolic process	name:Synonym:propan-2-one metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acetone, propan-2-one.
0045149	name:Name:acetoin metabolic process	name:Synonym:acetoin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving acetoin, 3-hydroxy-2-butanone, often as part of a fermentation pathway or for use as a carbon source.
0043446	name:Name:cellular alkane metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkane metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an alkane, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having the general formula CnH2n+2, as carried out by individual cells.
0015947	name:Name:methane metabolic process	name:Synonym:methane metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving methane, a colorless, odorless, flammable gas with the formula CH4. It is the simplest of the alkanes.
0043449	name:Name:cellular alkene metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an alkene, any acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having one carbon-carbon double bond and the general formula CnH2n, as carried out by individual cells.
0006691	name:Name:leukotriene metabolic process	name:Synonym:leukotriene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving leukotriene, a pharmacologically active substance derived from a polyunsaturated fatty acid, such as arachidonic acid.
0009692	name:Name:ethylene metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethene metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethene metabolism	name:Synonym:ethylene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ethylene (C2-H4, ethene), a simple hydrocarbon gas that can function in plants as a growth regulator.
0018966	name:Name:styrene metabolic process	name:Synonym:styrene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving styrene, an aromatic hydrocarbon liquid soluble in ether and alcohol. When heated, exposed to light or added to a peroxide catalyst, it undergoes polymerization to form polystyrene, a versatile material used in the manufacture of plastics, synthetic rubber, thermal insulation, and packaging. Styrene is a classified mutagen and a suspected carcinogen.
0018967	name:Name:tetrachloroethylene metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrachloroethene metabolic process	name:Synonym:tetrachloroethene metabolism	name:Synonym:tetrachloroethylene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving tetrachloroethylene (tetrachloroethene), a derivative of ethene with the hydrogen atoms replaced by chlorines. Tetrachloroethene has been used primarily as a solvent in dry-cleaning industries and to a lesser extent as a degreasing solvent.
0043452	name:Name:cellular alkyne metabolic process	name:Synonym:alkyne metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an alkyne, any cyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbon having a carbon-carbon triple bond and the general formula CnH2n-2, as carried out by individual cells.
0044107	name:Name:cellular alcohol metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom, as carried out by individual cells.
0008204	name:Name:ergosterol metabolic process	name:Synonym:ergosterol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ergosterol, (22E)-ergosta-5,7,22-trien-3-beta-ol, a sterol found in ergot, yeast and moulds. It is the most important of the D provitamins and is converted to vitamin D2 on irradiation with UV light.
0018902	name:Name:1,3-dichloro-2-propanol metabolic process	name:Synonym:1,3-dichloro-2-propanol metabolism	name:Synonym:DCP metabolic process	name:Synonym:DCP metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 1,3-dichloro-2-propanol (DCP), a halohydrin suspected of being carcinogenic, mutagenic and genotoxic. DCP is used as a general solvent, as an intermediate in organic synthesis and in paints, varnishes, lacquers, water colors, binders and photographic lacquers.
0044255	name:Name:cellular lipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular lipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lipids, as carried out by individual cells.
0006490	name:Name:oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate assembly	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate biosynthetic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of an oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate, such as a molecule of dolichol-P-man or dolicol-P-Glc used in N-linked glycosylation.
0006631	name:Name:fatty acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:fatty acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving fatty acids, aliphatic monocarboxylic acids liberated from naturally occurring fats and oils by hydrolysis.
0006638	name:Name:neutral lipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:neutral lipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving neutral lipids, lipids only soluble in solvents of very low polarity.
0006643	name:Name:membrane lipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:membrane lipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving membrane lipids, any lipid found in or associated with a biological membrane.
0006720	name:Name:isoprenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:isoprenoid metabolism	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyisoprenoid metabolism	name:Synonym:polyterpene metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyterpene metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving isoprenoid compounds, isoprene (2-methylbuta-1,3-diene) or compounds containing or derived from linked isoprene (3-methyl-2-butenylene) residues.
0008653	name:Name:lipopolysaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipopolysaccharide metabolism	name:Synonym:LPS metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lipopolysaccharides, any of a group of related, structurally complex components of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. Lipopolysaccharides consist three covalently linked regions, lipid A, core oligosaccharide, and an O side chain. Lipid A is responsible for the toxicity of the lipopolysaccharide.
0030258	name:Name:lipid modification	info:Definition:The covalent alteration of one or more fatty acids in a lipid, resulting in a change in the properties of the lipid.
0046486	name:Name:glycerolipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycerolipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycerolipids, any lipid with a glycerol backbone. Diacylglycerol and phosphatidate are key lipid intermediates of glycerolipid biosynthesis.
0044262	name:Name:cellular carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular carbohydrate metabolism	name:Synonym:main pathways of carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:main pathways of carbohydrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y, as carried out by individual cells.
0005984	name:Name:disaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:disaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any disaccharide, sugars composed of two monosaccharide units.
0005996	name:Name:monosaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:monosaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving monosaccharides, the simplest carbohydrates. They are polyhydric alcohols containing either an aldehyde or a keto group and between three to ten or more carbon atoms. They form the constitutional repeating units of oligo- and polysaccharides.
0006020	name:Name:inositol metabolic process	name:Synonym:inositol metabolism	name:Synonym:myo-inositol metabolic process	name:Synonym:myo-inositol metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin Bh metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin Bh metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving inositol, 1,2,3,4,5,6-cyclohexanehexol, a growth factor for animals and microorganisms.
0006097	name:Name:glyoxylate cycle	name:Synonym:glyoxylate bypass	info:Definition:A modification of the TCA cycle occurring in some plants and microorganisms, in which isocitrate is cleaved to glyoxylate and succinate. Glyoxylate can then react with acetyl-CoA to form malate.
0006486	name:Name:protein glycosylation	name:Synonym:protein amino acid glycosylation	info:Definition:A protein modification process that results in the addition of a sugar unit to a protein amino acid, e.g. the addition of glycan chains to proteins.
0009255	name:Name:Entner-Doudoroff pathway	info:Definition:A pathway that converts glucose to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate by producing 6-phosphogluconate and then dehydrating it.
0016137	name:Name:glycoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycoside metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycosides, compounds in which a glycosyl group is substituted into a hydroxyl, thiol or selenol group in another compound.
0019389	name:Name:glucuronoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:glucuronide metabolic process	name:Synonym:glucuronide metabolism	name:Synonym:glucuronoside metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glucuronosides, any compound formed by combination in glycosidic linkage of a hydroxy compound with the anomeric carbon atom of a glucuronate.
0019400	name:Name:alditol metabolic process	name:Synonym:alditol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alditols, any polyhydric alcohol derived from the acyclic form of a monosaccharide by reduction of its aldehyde or keto group to an alcoholic group.
0019520	name:Name:aldonic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:aldonic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aldonic acid, a monocarboxylic acid with a chain of three or more carbon atoms, derived from an aldose by oxidation of the aldehydic group.
0046835	name:Name:carbohydrate phosphorylation	info:Definition:The process of introducing a phosphate group into a carbohydrate, any organic compound based on the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0046838	name:Name:phosphorylated carbohydrate dephosphorylation	info:Definition:The process of removing a phosphate group from a phosphorylated carbohydrate, any organic compound based on the general formula Cx(H2O)y with a phosphate group attached to it.
0051478	name:Name:mannosylglycerate metabolic process	name:Synonym:mannosylglycerate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving mannosylglycerate, a very common compatible solute in thermophilic and hyperthermophilic organisms.
0051691	name:Name:cellular oligosaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular oligosaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages, as carried out by individual cells.
0052646	name:Name:alditol phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:alditol phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alditol phosphates, any phosphorylated polyhydric alcohol derived from the acyclic form of a monosaccharide by reduction of its aldehyde or keto group to an alcoholic group.
0046483	name:Name:heterocycle metabolic process	name:Synonym:heterocycle metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving heterocyclic compounds, those with a cyclic molecular structure and at least two different atoms in the ring (or rings).
0001692	name:Name:histamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:histamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving histamine, a physiologically active amine, found in plant and animal tissue and released from mast cells as part of an allergic reaction in humans.
0006014	name:Name:D-ribose metabolic process	name:Synonym:D-ribose metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving D-ribose (ribo-pentose). As beta-D-ribofuranose, D-ribose forms the glycose group of all ribonucleosides, ribonucleotides and ribonucleic acids, and also of ribose phosphates, various glycosides, some coenzymes and some forms of vitamin B12.
0006547	name:Name:histidine metabolic process	name:Synonym:histidine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving histidine, 2-amino-3-(1H-imidazol-4-yl)propanoic acid.
0006560	name:Name:proline metabolic process	name:Synonym:proline metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving proline (pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid), a chiral, cyclic, nonessential alpha-amino acid found in peptide linkage in proteins.
0018893	name:Name:dibenzofuran metabolic process	name:Synonym:dibenzofuran metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dibenzofuran, a substance composed of two benzene rings linked by one ether bond and one carbon-carbon bond. Dibenzofuran is a white crystalline solid created from the production of coal tar and used as an insecticide and an intermediate in the production of other chemicals.
0018894	name:Name:dibenzo-p-dioxin metabolic process	name:Synonym:dibenzo-p-dioxin metabolism	name:Synonym:oxanthrene metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxanthrene metabolism	name:Synonym:phenodioxin metabolic process	name:Synonym:phenodioxin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dibenzo-p-dioxin, a substance composed of two benzene rings linked by two ether bonds. Dibenzo-p-dioxins are generated as by-products in the manufacturing of herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, paper pulp bleaching, and in incineration, and can accumulate in milk and throughout the food chain, creating significant health concern.
0018922	name:Name:iprodione metabolic process	name:Synonym:iprodione metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving prodione, a colorless, odorless crystal. It is used as a dicarboximide contact fungicide to control a wide variety of crop diseases by inhibiting the germination of spores and the growth of the fungal mat (mycelium).
0018930	name:Name:3-methylquinoline metabolic process	name:Synonym:3-methylquinoline metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 3-methylquinoline, C10H9N, an aromatic compound composed of a benzene ring and a heterocyclic N-containing ring.
0019471	name:Name:4-hydroxyproline metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-hydroxyproline metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 4-hydroxyproline, C5H9NO3, a derivative of the amino acid proline. The presence of hydroxyproline is essential to produce stable triple helical tropocollagen, hence the problems caused by ascorbate deficiency in scurvy. This unusual amino acid is also present in considerable amounts in the major glycoprotein of primary plant cell walls.
0030417	name:Name:nicotianamine metabolic process	name:Synonym:nicotianamine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving nicotianamine, 2(S),3'2(S),3''(S)-N-(N-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid.
0033049	name:Name:clavulanic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:clavulanic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving clavulanic acid, (2R,3Z,5R)-3-(2-hydroxyethylidene)-7-oxo-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]heptane-2-carboxylic acid.
0033067	name:Name:macrolide metabolic process	name:Synonym:macrolide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving macrolides, any of a large group of polyketide compounds that contain a large lactone ring with few or no double bonds and no nitrogen atoms, linked glycosidically to one or more sugar groups. The macrolides include the carbomycins, the erythromycins, oleandomycin, oligomycins, and the spiramycins, and act as antibiotics, mainly against Gram-positive bacteria.
0034275	name:Name:kynurenic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-hydroxyquinoline-2-carboxylic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:kynurenic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving kynurenic acid, 4-hydroxyquinoline-2-carboxylic acid.
0042360	name:Name:vitamin E metabolic process	name:Synonym:alpha-tocopherol metabolic process	name:Synonym:alpha-tocopherol metabolism	name:Synonym:tocopherol metabolic process	name:Synonym:tocopherol metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin E metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving vitamin E, tocopherol, which includes a series of eight structurally similar compounds. Alpha-tocopherol is the most active form in humans and is a powerful biological antioxidant.
0042816	name:Name:vitamin B6 metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin B6 metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of the vitamin B6 compounds: pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine and the active form, pyridoxal phosphate.
0046484	name:Name:oxazole or thiazole metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxazole or thiazole metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving oxazole or thiazole, five-membered heterocyclic ring structures containing an oxygen and a sulfur, respectively, in the 1-position and a nitrogen in the 3-position.
0046518	name:Name:octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane metabolic process	name:Synonym:octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane, a cyclic silicone-oxygen ring compound with two methyl groups attached to each silicone atom.
0046584	name:Name:enniatin metabolic process	name:Synonym:enniatin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving enniatins, any of various cyclodepsipeptide antibiotics from Fusarium species that function as ionophores.
0070484	name:Name:dehydro-D-arabinono-1,4-lactone metabolic process	name:Synonym:dehydro-D-arabinono-1,4-lactone metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dehydro-D-arabinono-1,4-lactone, the gamma-lactone (5R)-3,4-dihydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)furan-2(5H)-one.
0072338	name:Name:cellular lactam metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular lactam metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lactams, any cyclic amides of amino carboxylic acids, having a 1-azacycloalkan-2-one structure, or analogues having unsaturation or heteroatoms replacing one or more carbon atoms of the ring.
0046950	name:Name:cellular ketone body metabolic process	name:Synonym:ketone body metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ketone bodies, any one of the three substances: acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate) or acetone, as carried out by individual cells. Although 3-hydroxybutyrate is not a ketone, it is classed as a ketone body because it exists in an equilibrium with acetoacetate. Ketone bodies may accumulate in excessive amounts in the body in starvation, diabetes mellitus or in other defects of carbohydrate metabolism.
0051186	name:Name:cofactor metabolic process	name:Synonym:cofactor metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cofactor, a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein. Cofactors may be inorganic, such as the metal atoms zinc, iron, and copper in certain forms, or organic, in which case they are referred to as coenzymes. Cofactors may either be bound tightly to active sites or bind loosely with the substrate.
0006732	name:Name:coenzyme metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme and prosthetic group metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme and prosthetic group metabolism	name:Synonym:coenzyme metabolism	name:Synonym:group transfer coenzyme metabolic process	name:Synonym:group transfer coenzyme metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving coenzymes, any of various nonprotein organic cofactors that are required, in addition to an enzyme and a substrate, for an enzymatic reaction to proceed.
0009237	name:Name:siderophore metabolic process	name:Synonym:siderochrome metabolic process	name:Synonym:siderochrome metabolism	name:Synonym:siderophore metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving siderophores, low molecular weight Fe(III)-chelating substances made by aerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria, especially when growing under iron deficient conditions. The complexes of Fe(3+)-siderophores have very high stability constants and are taken up by specific transport systems by microorganisms; the subsequent release of iron requires enzymatic action.
0042375	name:Name:quinone cofactor metabolic process	name:Synonym:quinone cofactor metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving quinone cofactors.
0042822	name:Name:pyridoxal phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:active vitamin B6 metabolic process	name:Synonym:active vitamin B6 metabolism	name:Synonym:pyridoxal phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving pyridoxal phosphate, pyridoxal phosphorylated at the hydroxymethyl group of C-5, the active form of vitamin B6.
0051068	name:Name:dihydrolipoamide metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrolipoamide metabolism	name:Synonym:dihydrolipoamide reduction	name:Synonym:dihydrothioctamide metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydrothioctamide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving dihydrolipoamide, the reduced form of lipoamide, produced as an intermediate in the reactions in which lipoamide acts as a cofactor.
0051189	name:Name:prosthetic group metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme and prosthetic group metabolic process	name:Synonym:coenzyme and prosthetic group metabolism	name:Synonym:prosthetic group metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a prosthetic group, the non-amino acid portion of certain protein molecules. Prosthetic groups may be inorganic or organic and are usually required for the biological activity of the protein.
0051206	name:Name:silicate metabolic process	name:Synonym:silicate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving silicates, the salts of silicic acids. Silicates are usually composed of silicon and oxygen (Si[x]O[y]), one or more metals, and possibly hydrogen. Types of silicate include unisilicates, metasilicates and hydrous silicates.
0052314	name:Name:phytoalexin metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytoalexin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytoalexins, any of a range of substances produced by plants as part of their defense response.
0046289	name:Name:isoflavonoid phytoalexin metabolic process	name:Synonym:isoflavonoid phytoalexin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving isoflavonoid phytoalexins, a group of water-soluble phenolic derivatives isomeric with flavonoids that possess antibiotic activity and are produced by plant tissues in response to infection.
0051501	name:Name:diterpene phytoalexin metabolic process	name:Synonym:diterpene phytoalexin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving diterpene phytoalexins, a class of diterpene formed in plants in response to fungal infection, physical damage, chemical injury, or a pathogenic process; they are sometimes referred to as plant antibiotics. Diterpenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing 20 carbon atoms and 4 branched methyl groups and are made up of isoprenoid units.
0072592	name:Name:oxygen metabolic process	name:Synonym:diatomic oxygen metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxygen metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving diatomic oxygen (O2).
0072593	name:Name:reactive oxygen species metabolic process	name:Synonym:reactive oxygen species metabolism	name:Synonym:ROS metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a reactive oxygen species, any molecules or ions formed by the incomplete one-electron reduction of oxygen. They contribute to the microbicidal activity of phagocytes, regulation of signal transduction and gene expression, and the oxidative damage to biopolymers.
0006801	name:Name:superoxide metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxygen free radical metabolic process	name:Synonym:oxygen free radical metabolism	name:Synonym:superoxide free radical metabolic process	name:Synonym:superoxide free radical metabolism	name:Synonym:superoxide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving superoxide, the superoxide anion O2- (superoxide free radical), or any compound containing this species.
0042743	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide metabolic process	name:Synonym:H2O2 metabolic process	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a potentially harmful byproduct of aerobic cellular respiration which can cause damage to DNA.
0090345	name:Name:cellular organohalogen metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organohalogen compounds, as carried out by individual cells.
0090346	name:Name:cellular organofluorine metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organofluorine compounds, as carried out by individual cells.
0044238	name:Name:primary metabolic process	name:Synonym:primary metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving those compounds which are formed as a part of the normal anabolic and catabolic processes. These processes take place in most, if not all, cells of the organism.
0005975	name:Name:carbohydrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:carbohydrate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y. Includes the formation of carbohydrate derivatives by the addition of a carbohydrate residue to another molecule.
0009311	name:Name:oligosaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:oligosaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving oligosaccharides, molecules with between two and (about) 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages.
0019577	name:Name:aldaric acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:aldaric acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving aldaric acid, any dicarboxylic acid formed by oxidation of by the terminal groups of an aldose to carboxyl group.
0019583	name:Name:galactonate metabolic process	name:Synonym:galactonate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving galactonate, the anion of galactonic acid, an organic acid derived from the sugar galactose.
0070085	name:Name:glycosylation	info:Definition:The covalent attachment of a glycosyl residue to a substrate molecule.
0006520	name:Name:cellular amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:amino acid and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids, carboxylic acids containing one or more amino groups, as carried out by individual cells.
0006575	name:Name:cellular modified amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:amino acid derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:cellular modified amino acid metabolism	name:Synonym:modified amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:modified amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving compounds derived from amino acids, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents.
0006591	name:Name:ornithine metabolic process	name:Synonym:ornithine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ornithine, an amino acid only rarely found in proteins, but which is important in living organisms as an intermediate in the reactions of the urea cycle and in arginine biosynthesis.
0008652	name:Name:cellular amino acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:amino acid biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid anabolism	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid formation	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of amino acids, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents.
0009063	name:Name:cellular amino acid catabolic process	name:Synonym:amino acid catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid breakdown	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid catabolism	name:Synonym:cellular amino acid degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of amino acids, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents.
0009064	name:Name:glutamine family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:glutamine family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the glutamine family, comprising arginine, glutamate, glutamine and proline.
0009066	name:Name:aspartate family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:aspartate family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the aspartate family, comprising asparagine, aspartate, lysine, methionine and threonine.
0009069	name:Name:serine family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:serine family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the serine family, comprising cysteine, glycine, homoserine, selenocysteine and serine.
0009075	name:Name:histidine family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:histidine family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids of the histidine family.
0009078	name:Name:pyruvate family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:pyruvate family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any amino acid that requires pyruvate for its synthesis, e.g. alanine.
0009081	name:Name:branched chain family amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:branched chain family amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving amino acids containing a branched carbon skeleton, comprising isoleucine, leucine and valine.
0009437	name:Name:carnitine metabolic process	name:Synonym:carnitine metabolism	name:Synonym:vitamin Bt metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin Bt metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving carnitine (hydroxy-trimethyl aminobutyric acid), a compound that participates in the transfer of acyl groups across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
0009448	name:Name:gamma-aminobutyric acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-aminobutanoate metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-aminobutanoate metabolism	name:Synonym:4-aminobutyrate metabolic process	name:Synonym:4-aminobutyrate metabolism	name:Synonym:GABA metabolic process	name:Synonym:GABA metabolism	name:Synonym:gamma-aminobutyric acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, 4-aminobutyrate), an amino acid which acts as a neurotransmitter in some organisms.
0018366	name:Name:chiral amino acid racemization	info:Definition:The formation of a mixture of the two possible enantiomers from the D- or L-enantiomer of a chiral amino acid.
0018871	name:Name:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate metabolic process	name:Synonym:1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate metabolism	name:Synonym:ACP metabolic process	name:Synonym:ACP metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate, the anion of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, a natural product found in plant tissues. It is a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of ethylene (ethene), a fruit-ripening hormone in plants.
0019482	name:Name:beta-alanine metabolic process	name:Synonym:beta-alanine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving beta-alanine (3-aminopropanoic acid), an achiral amino acid and an isomer of alanine. It occurs free (e.g. in brain) and in combination (e.g. in pantothenate) but it is not a constituent of proteins.
0030393	name:Name:fructoselysine metabolic process	name:Synonym:fructoselysine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving fructoselysine, a fructose molecule containing a lysine group in place of a hydroxyl group.
0030394	name:Name:fructoseglycine metabolic process	name:Synonym:fructoseglycine metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving fructoseglycine, a fructose molecule containing a glycine group in place of a hydroxyl group.
0043038	name:Name:amino acid activation	info:Definition:The modification of an amino acid to an active form, for incorporation into a peptide, protein or other macromolecule.
0046416	name:Name:D-amino acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:D-amino acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving D-amino acids, the D-enantiomers of amino acids.
0006629	name:Name:lipid metabolic process	name:Synonym:lipid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving lipids, compounds soluble in an organic solvent but not, or sparingly, in an aqueous solvent. Includes fatty acids; neutral fats, other fatty-acid esters, and soaps; long-chain (fatty) alcohols and waxes; sphingoids and other long-chain bases; glycolipids, phospholipids and sphingolipids; and carotenes, polyprenols, sterols, terpenes and other isoprenoids.
0008202	name:Name:steroid metabolic process	name:Synonym:steroid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving steroids, compounds with a 1,2,cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nucleus.
0044281	name:Name:small molecule metabolic process	name:Synonym:small molecule metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving small molecules, any monomeric molecule of small relative molecular mass.
0002148	name:Name:hypochlorous acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:HClO metabolic process	name:Synonym:HOCl metabolic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorite metabolic process	name:Synonym:hypochlorous acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving hypochlorous acid.
0006066	name:Name:alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:alcohol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving alcohols, any of a class of compounds containing one or more hydroxyl groups attached to a saturated carbon atom.
0016090	name:Name:prenol metabolic process	name:Synonym:prenol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving prenols, isoprenoids of general formula (H-CH2-C(CH3)=CH-CH2-)n-OH, any primary monohydroxy alcohol whose carbon skeleton consists of two or more isoprenoid residues linked head to tail.
0016125	name:Name:sterol metabolic process	name:Synonym:sterol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving sterols, steroids with one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0018958	name:Name:phenol-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:carbolic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:carbolic acid metabolism	name:Synonym:hydroxybenzene metabolic process	name:Synonym:hydroxybenzene metabolism	name:Synonym:phenol-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a phenol, any compound containing one or more hydroxyl groups directly attached to an aromatic carbon ring.
0019638	name:Name:6-hydroxycineole metabolic process	name:Synonym:6-endo-hydroxycineole metabolic process	name:Synonym:6-endo-hydroxycineole metabolism	name:Synonym:6-hydroxycineole metabolism	name:Synonym:hydroxycineol metabolic process	name:Synonym:hydroxycineol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 6-hydroxycineole (6-hydroxy-1,8-epoxy-p-menthane), a hydrocarbon with the formula C10H18O2.
0019751	name:Name:polyol metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyhydric alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:polyol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a polyol, any alcohol containing three or more hydroxyl groups attached to saturated carbon atoms.
0033306	name:Name:phytol metabolic process	name:Synonym:phytol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving phytol, (2E,7R,11R)-3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadec-2-en-1-ol.
0034308	name:Name:primary alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:monohydric alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:primary alcohol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving primary alcohols. A primary alcohol is any alcohol in which a hydroxy group, -OH, is attached to a saturated carbon atom which has either three hydrogen atoms attached to it or only one other carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms attached to it.
0034311	name:Name:diol metabolic process	name:Synonym:dihydric alcohol metabolic process	name:Synonym:diol metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a diol, any alcohol containing two hydroxyl groups attached to saturated carbon atoms.
0042439	name:Name:ethanolamine-containing compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethanolamine and derivative metabolic process	name:Synonym:ethanolamine and derivative metabolism	name:Synonym:ethanolamine-containing compound metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving ethanolamine (2-aminoethanol) and compounds derived from it.
0006766	name:Name:vitamin metabolic process	name:Synonym:vitamin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving vitamins. Vitamin is a general term for a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body. Vitamins may be water-soluble or fat-soluble and usually serve as components of coenzyme systems.
0006767	name:Name:water-soluble vitamin metabolic process	name:Synonym:water-soluble vitamin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any of a diverse group of vitamins that are soluble in water.
0006775	name:Name:fat-soluble vitamin metabolic process	name:Synonym:fat-soluble vitamin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving of any of a diverse group of vitamins that are soluble in organic solvents and relatively insoluble in water.
0018904	name:Name:organic ether metabolic process	name:Synonym:organic ether metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organic ethers, any anhydride of the general formula R1-O-R2, formed between two identical or nonidentical organic hydroxy compounds.
0006662	name:Name:glycerol ether metabolic process	name:Synonym:glycerol ether metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving glycerol ethers, any anhydride formed between two organic hydroxy compounds, one of which is glycerol.
0018901	name:Name:2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:2,4-D metabolic process	name:Synonym:2,4-D metabolism	name:Synonym:2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, a chlorinated phenoxy compound which functions as a systemic herbicide and is used to control many types of broadleaf weeds.
0018980	name:Name:2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid metabolic process	name:Synonym:2,4,5-T metabolic process	name:Synonym:2,4,5-T metabolism	name:Synonym:2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, a chlorinated aromatic compound which is widely used as a herbicide, often as a weed killer for home lawns.
0055086	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide metabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide metabolism	info:Definition:The cellular chemical reactions and pathways involving nucleobases, nucleosides and nucleotides.
0006753	name:Name:nucleoside phosphate metabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleoside phosphate metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any phosphorylated nucleoside.
0009116	name:Name:nucleoside metabolic process	name:Synonym:nucleoside metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a nucleoside, a nucleobase linked to either beta-D-ribofuranose (a ribonucleoside) or 2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranose, (a deoxyribonucleoside), e.g. adenosine, guanosine, inosine, cytidine, uridine and deoxyadenosine, deoxyguanosine, deoxycytidine and thymidine (= deoxythymidine).
0015949	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide interconversion	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which a nucleobase, nucleoside or nucleotide is synthesized from another nucleobase, nucleoside or nucleotide.
0070276	name:Name:halogen metabolic process	name:Synonym:halogen metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving any halogen, elements of Group VII; includes metabolism of halogen-containing compounds.
0018079	name:Name:protein halogenation	name:Synonym:protein amino acid halogenation	info:Definition:The addition of a halogen to a protein amino acid.
0070277	name:Name:iodide oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which iodide is converted to diiodine, with the concomitant loss of electrons.
0045730	name:Name:respiratory burst	name:Synonym:metabolic burst	name:Synonym:oxidative burst	info:Definition:A phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases; this leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals.
0045729	name:Name:respiratory burst at fertilization	name:Synonym:metabolic burst at fertilization	name:Synonym:oxidative burst at fertilization	info:Definition:The phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases, that occurs at fertilization. An enhanced uptake of oxygen leads to the production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals. Capacitation, a necessary prerequisite event to successful fertilization, can be induced by reactive oxygen species in vitro; hydrogen peroxide is used as an extracellular oxidant to cross-link the protective surface envelopes.
0055114	name:Name:oxidation-reduction process	name:Synonym:oxidation reduction	name:Synonym:oxidoreductase process	info:Definition:A metabolic process that results in the removal or addition of one or more electrons to or from a substance, with or without the concomitant removal or addition of a proton or protons.
0006069	name:Name:ethanol oxidation	info:Definition:An ethanol metabolic process in which ethanol is converted to acetyl-CoA via acetaldehyde and acetate.
0006116	name:Name:NADH oxidation	name:Synonym:NAD (reduced) dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:NAD (reduced) oxidation	name:Synonym:NADH dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced NAD dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced NAD oxidation	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidation	info:Definition:A metabolic process that results in the oxidation of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, NADH, to the oxidized form, NAD.
0006150	name:Name:hypoxanthine oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of hypoxanthine to xanthine and thence to uric acid.
0006151	name:Name:xanthine oxidation	info:Definition:The oxidation of xanthine, 2,6-dihydroxypurine, a purine formed in the metabolic breakdown of guanine but not present in nucleic acids.
0006740	name:Name:NADPH regeneration	name:Synonym:NADP (reduced) regeneration	name:Synonym:reduced NADP regeneration	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate regeneration	info:Definition:A metabolic process that generates a pool of NADPH by the reduction of NADP+.
0006098	name:Name:pentose-phosphate shunt	name:Synonym:hexose monophosphate pathway	name:Synonym:pentose phosphate pathway	name:Synonym:pentose phosphate shunt	name:Synonym:pentose-phosphate pathway	info:Definition:The process in which glucose is oxidized, coupled to NADPH synthesis. Glucose 6-P is oxidized with the formation of carbon dioxide (CO2), ribulose 5-phosphate and reduced NADP; ribulose 5-P then enters a series of reactions interconverting sugar phosphates. The pentose phosphate pathway is a major source of reducing equivalents for biosynthesis reactions and is also important for the conversion of hexoses to pentoses.
0009780	name:Name:photosynthetic NADP+ reduction	info:Definition:An NADPH regeneration process that contributes to the light reactions of photosynthesis. The light reactions of photosynthesis use energy from photons to generate high-energy electrons. These electrons are used directly to reduce NADP+ to NADPH. NADPH is a relatively stable molecule and can pass on its hydrogen atom to other molecules in chemical reactions.
0009444	name:Name:pyruvate oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of pyruvate to acetylphosphate.
0010241	name:Name:ent-kaurene oxidation to kaurenoic acid	name:Synonym:ent-kaurene oxidation to ent-kaur-16-en-19-oate	name:Synonym:ent-kaurene oxidation to ent-kaurenoate	name:Synonym:ent-kaurene oxidation to kaurenoic acid by ent-kaurene oxidase	info:Definition:The three successive oxidations of the 4-methyl group of ent-kaurene to form ent-kaur-16-en-19-oate, kaurenoic acid. This process may be carried out entirely by the enzyme ent-kaurene oxidase.
0015944	name:Name:formate oxidation	name:Synonym:formic acid oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways by which formate is converted to CO2.
0015946	name:Name:methanol oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of methanol to methyl-Coenzyme M.
0018158	name:Name:protein oxidation	name:Synonym:protein amino acid oxidation	info:Definition:The modification of a protein amino acid by oxidation.
0018057	name:Name:peptidyl-lysine oxidation	info:Definition:The oxidation of the terminal amino-methylene groups of peptidyl-L-lysine or peptidyl-5-hydroxy-L-lysine to aldehyde groups to form allysine or hydroxyallysine residues, respectively; these are intermediates in the formation of covalent cross-links between adjacent polypeptide chains in proteins such as collagens.
0018159	name:Name:peptidyl-methionine oxidation	info:Definition:The oxidation of peptidyl-L-methionine to peptidyl-L-methionine sulfone.
0018171	name:Name:peptidyl-cysteine oxidation	info:Definition:The oxidation of peptidyl-cysteine to peptidyl-L-cysteine sulfinic acid or peptidyl-L-cysteine sulfenic acid.
0019728	name:Name:peptidyl-allysine oxidation to 2-aminoadipic acid	info:Definition:The oxidation of allysine to 2-aminoadipic acid.
0019926	name:Name:peptidyl-tryptophan oxidation to tryptophyl quinone	info:Definition:The oxidation of peptidyl-tryptophan to form tryptophan-6,7-dione, otherwise known as tryptophyl quinone, which is further modified by cross-linking to either tryptophan or cysteine.
0034438	name:Name:lipoprotein amino acid oxidation	info:Definition:The modification of a lipoprotein by oxidation of one or more amino acids in the protein.
0019293	name:Name:tyrosine biosynthetic process, by oxidation of phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine anabolism from chorismate via L-phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine anabolism, by oxidation of phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine biosynthetic process from chorismate via L-phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine formation from chorismate via L-phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine formation, by oxidation of phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine synthesis from chorismate via L-phenylalanine	name:Synonym:tyrosine synthesis, by oxidation of phenylalanine	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of tyrosine by the oxidation of phenylalanine.
0019399	name:Name:cyclohexanol oxidation	info:Definition:The cyclohexanol metabolic process in which cyclohexanol is converted to adipate.
0019479	name:Name:L-alanine oxidation to D-lactate and ammonia	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-alanine to D-lactate and ammonia.
0019480	name:Name:L-alanine oxidation to pyruvate via D-alanine	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of L-alanine to pyruvate, with D-alanine as an intermediate.
0019498	name:Name:n-octane oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of n-octane to octanoyl-CoA.
0019516	name:Name:lactate oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the conversion of lactate to other compounds, such as pyruvate, with concomitant loss of electrons.
0019561	name:Name:anaerobic phenylalanine oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of phenylalanine under anaerobic conditions; occurs via the intermediates phenylpyruvate and phenylacetaldehyde.
0019600	name:Name:toluene oxidation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the loss of electrons from one or more atoms in toluene.
0019601	name:Name:toluene oxidation via 2-hydroxytoluene	info:Definition:The degradation of toluene to form pyruvate and acetaldehyde; the first step in the pathway is the oxidation of toluene to form 2-hydroxytoluene (o-cresol).
0019602	name:Name:toluene oxidation via 3-hydroxytoluene	info:Definition:The degradation of toluene to form pyruvate and acetaldehyde; the first step in the pathway is the oxidation of toluene to form 3-hydroxytoluene (m-cresol).
0019603	name:Name:toluene oxidation via 4-hydroxytoluene	info:Definition:The degradation of toluene to form p-hydroxybenzoate; the first step in the pathway is the oxidation of toluene to form 4-hydroxytoluene (4-cresol).
0019604	name:Name:toluene oxidation to catechol	info:Definition:The formation from toluene of catechol, dihydroxybenzene, by successive oxidations followed by loss of carbon dioxide (CO2).
0019696	name:Name:toluene oxidation via toluene-cis-1,2-dihydrodiol	info:Definition:The degradation of toluene to form pyruvate and acetaldehyde; the first step in the pathway is the oxidation of toluene to form toluene-cis-1,2-dihydrodiol.
0034440	name:Name:lipid oxidation	info:Definition:The removal of one or more electrons from a lipid, with or without the concomitant removal of a proton or protons, by reaction with an electron-accepting substance, by addition of oxygen or by removal of hydrogen.
0019395	name:Name:fatty acid oxidation	info:Definition:The removal of one or more electrons from a fatty acid, with or without the concomitant removal of a proton or protons, by reaction with an electron-accepting substance, by addition of oxygen or by removal of hydrogen.
0034439	name:Name:lipoprotein lipid oxidation	info:Definition:The modification of a lipoprotein by oxidation of the lipid group.
0042161	name:Name:lipoprotein oxidation	info:Definition:The modification of a lipoprotein by oxidation of one or more amino acids or the lipid group.
0034441	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle oxidation	name:Synonym:plasma lipoprotein oxidation	info:Definition:The modification of a lipoprotein by oxidation of one or more amino acids or the lipid group, occurring in the blood plasma.
0070989	name:Name:oxidative demethylation	info:Definition:The process of removing one or more methyl groups from a molecule, involving the oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms in the substrate.
0035511	name:Name:oxidative DNA demethylation	info:Definition:Removal of the methyl group from one or more nucleotides within a DNA molecule involving the oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms.
0035513	name:Name:oxidative RNA demethylation	info:Definition:The removal of the methyl group from one or more nucleotides within an RNA molecule involving oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms.
0070995	name:Name:NADPH oxidation	name:Synonym:NADP (reduced) dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:NADP (reduced) oxidation	name:Synonym:NADPH dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced NADP dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced NADP oxidation	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate dehydrogenation	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidation	info:Definition:A metabolic process that results in the oxidation of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, NADPH, to the oxidized form, NADP.
0071615	name:Name:oxidative deethylation	info:Definition:The process of removing one or more ethyl groups from a molecule, involving the oxidation (i.e. electron loss) of one or more atoms in the substrate.
0071704	name:Name:organic substance metabolic process	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving organic substances, any molecular entities containing carbon.
0010411	name:Name:xyloglucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:xyloglucan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving xyloglucan, the cross-linking glycan composed of (1->4)-beta-D-glucan backbone substituted at regular intervals with beta-D-xylosyl-(1->6) residues, which is present in the primary cell wall of most higher plants.
2000899	name:Name:xyloglucan catabolic process	name:Synonym:xyloglucan catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a xyloglucan.
0015977	name:Name:carbon fixation	name:Synonym:autotrophic CO2 fixation	name:Synonym:autotrophic CO2 fixation pathway	name:Synonym:autotrophy	info:Definition:A metabolic process in which carbon (usually derived from carbon dioxide) is incorporated into organic compounds (usually carbohydrates).
0009761	name:Name:CAM photosynthesis	info:Definition:The combination of atmospheric CO2 with a 3-carbon molecule phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) to make malic acid. The malic acid is then passed into the vacuole where it is stored until daylight, when it is shuttled back out to be used as a substrate in the light reaction of photosynthesis.
0019643	name:Name:reductive tricarboxylic acid cycle	name:Synonym:reductive carboxylate cycle	name:Synonym:reductive carboxylic acid cycle	name:Synonym:reductive citric acid pathway	name:Synonym:reductive Kreb's cycle	name:Synonym:reductive TCA cycle	info:Definition:A pathway leading to the fixation of two molecules of CO2 and the production of one molecule of acetyl-CoA; essentially the oxidative TCA cycle running in reverse. Acetyl-CoA is reductively carboxylated to pyruvate, from which all other central metabolites can be formed. Most of the enzymes of reductive and oxidative TCA cycle are shared, with the exception of three key enzymes that allow the cycle to run in reverse: ATP citrate lyase, 2-oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase, and fumarate reductase. 2-oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase catalyzes the carboxylation of succinyl-CoA to 2-oxoglutarate, ATP citrate lyase the ATP-dependent cleavage of citrate to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate, and fumarate reductase the reduction of fumarate forming succinate.
0030634	name:Name:carbon fixation by acetyl-CoA pathway	name:Synonym:Ljungdahl-Wood pathway	info:Definition:A pathway of carbon dioxide fixation in which one molecule of acetyl-CoA is completely synthesized from two molecules of carbon dioxide (CO2).
0043427	name:Name:carbon fixation by 3-hydroxypropionate cycle	name:Synonym:3-hydroxypropionate cycle	name:Synonym:3-hydroxypropionate pathway	name:Synonym:hydroxypropionate cycle	name:Synonym:hydroxypropionate pathway	info:Definition:An autotrophic carbon dioxide fixation pathway by which two molecules of carbon dioxide are fixed to form glyoxylate. Acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) is assumed to be converted to malate, and two CO2 molecules are thereby fixed. Malyl-CoA is thought to be cleaved to acetyl-CoA, the starting molecule, and glyoxylate, the carbon fixation product.
2000889	name:Name:cellodextrin metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellodextrin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cellodextrin.
0045493	name:Name:xylan catabolic process	name:Synonym:xylan breakdown	name:Synonym:xylan catabolism	name:Synonym:xylan degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of xylan, a polymer containing a beta-1,4-linked D-xylose backbone.
0046355	name:Name:mannan catabolic process	name:Synonym:mannan breakdown	name:Synonym:mannan catabolism	name:Synonym:mannan degradation	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of mannan, the main hemicellulose of soft (coniferous) wood, made up of D-mannose, D-glucose and D-galactose.
2000890	name:Name:cellodextrin catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellodextrin catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cellodextrin.
2000891	name:Name:cellobiose metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellobiose metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cellobiose.
2000892	name:Name:cellobiose catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellobiose catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cellobiose.
2000893	name:Name:cellotriose metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellotriose metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cellotriose.
2000894	name:Name:cellotriose catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellotriose catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cellotriose.
2000896	name:Name:amylopectin metabolic process	name:Synonym:Amylopectin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving an amylopectin.
2000897	name:Name:amylopectin catabolic process	name:Synonym:Amylopectin catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of an amylopectin.
2000900	name:Name:cyclodextrin metabolic process	name:Synonym:cyclodextrin metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cyclodextrin.
2000901	name:Name:cyclodextrin catabolic process	name:Synonym:cyclodextrin catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cyclodextrin.
2000902	name:Name:cellooligosaccharide metabolic process	name:Synonym:cellooligosaccharide metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving a cellooligosaccharide.
2000903	name:Name:cellooligosaccharide catabolic process	name:Synonym:cellooligosaccharide catabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of a cellooligosaccharide.
0008283	name:Name:cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0001833	name:Name:inner cell mass cell proliferation	info:Definition:The proliferation of cells in the inner cell mass.
0001834	name:Name:trophectodermal cell proliferation	name:Synonym:trophectoderm cell proliferation	info:Definition:The proliferation of cells in the trophectoderm.
0002174	name:Name:mammary stem cell proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a mammary stem cell population by cell division. Mammary stem cells are a source of cells for growth of the mammary gland during puberty and gestation. These cells can give rise to both the luminal and myoepithelial cell types of the gland, and can regenerate the entire organ.
0002176	name:Name:male germ cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of male germ cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0003263	name:Name:cardioblast proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cardioblasts, resulting in the expansion of the population in the heart field. A cardioblast is a cardiac precursor cell. It is a cell that has been committed to a cardiac fate, but will undergo more cell division rather than terminally differentiating.
0003295	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in atrial ventricular junction remodeling	name:Synonym:cell proliferation involved in atrio-ventricular junction remodeling 	name:Synonym:cell proliferation involved in atrioventricular junction remodeling	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells that contributes to the reorganization of tissue resulting in the maturation of the atrial ventricular junction.
0003419	name:Name:growth plate cartilage chondrocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of chondrocytes in a growing endochondral bone, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0010463	name:Name:mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesenchymal cell population. A mesenchymal cell is a cell that normally gives rise to other cells that are organized as three-dimensional masses, rather than sheets.
0060781	name:Name:mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of mesenchymal cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the progression of the prostate gland over time.
0060916	name:Name:mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesenchymal cell population that contributes to the progression of the lung over time. A mesenchymal cell is a cell that normally gives rise to other cells that are organized as three-dimensional masses, rather than sheets.
0072135	name:Name:kidney mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesenchymal cell population in the kidney.
0061222	name:Name:mesonephric mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in mesonephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesonephric mesenchymal cell population.
0072136	name:Name:metanephric mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in metanephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a metanephric mesenchymal cell population.
0072137	name:Name:condensed mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a condensed mesenchymal cell population. A condensed mesenchymal cell population is a population of adherent mesenchymal cells.
0072138	name:Name:mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in ureteric bud development	name:Synonym:ureteric bud mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesenchymal cell population of the ureteric bud, that contributes to ureteric bud development.
0072198	name:Name:mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in ureter development	name:Synonym:ureter mesenchymal cell proliferation	name:Synonym:ureteral mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a mesenchymal cell population of the ureter, that contributes to ureter development.
0090094	name:Name:metanephric cap mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in metanephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of metanephric cap mesenchymal cells, resulting in the expansion of the cell population. A metanephric cap mesenchymal cell is a mesenchymal cell that has condensed with other mesenchymal cells surrounding the ureteric bud tip.
0014009	name:Name:glial cell proliferation	name:Synonym:glia proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of glial cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Glial cells exist throughout the nervous system, and include Schwann cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes among others.
0014010	name:Name:Schwann cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of Schwann cells, resulting in the expansion of their population. Schwann cells are a type of glial cell in the peripheral nervous system.
0014011	name:Name:Schwann cell proliferation involved in axon regeneration	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of Schwann cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population in response to an axonal lesion. The newly generated Schwann cells support subsequent axon regeneration in the peripheral nervous system.
0014841	name:Name:satellite cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of satellite cells, resulting in the expansion of the cell population. Satellite cells are quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the muscle fiber, which are the main contributors to postnatal muscle growth. In adult muscle, satellite cells become activated to divide and differentiate in response to muscle damage.
0033002	name:Name:muscle cell proliferation	name:Synonym:myocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a muscle cell population by cell division.
0014855	name:Name:striated muscle cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of striated muscle cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Striated muscles contain fibers that are divided by transverse bands into striations, and cardiac and skeletal muscle are types of striated muscle.
0014856	name:Name:skeletal muscle cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of skeletal muscle cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0060038	name:Name:cardiac muscle cell proliferation	name:Synonym:cardiac myocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:cardiomyocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:heart muscle cell proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a cardiac muscle cell population by cell division.
0048659	name:Name:smooth muscle cell proliferation	name:Synonym:SMC proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of smooth muscle cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0033687	name:Name:osteoblast proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of osteoblasts, resulting in the expansion of an osteoblast cell population. An osteoblast is a bone-forming cell which secretes an extracellular matrix. Hydroxyapatite crystals are then deposited into the matrix to form bone.
0035726	name:Name:common myeloid progenitor cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of common myeloid progenitor cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. A common myeloid progenitor cell is a progenitor cell committed to the myeloid lineage.
0035736	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in compound eye morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to compound eye morphogenesis.
0043616	name:Name:keratinocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of keratinocytes, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Keratinocytes are epidermal cells which synthesize keratin and undergo a characteristic change as they move upward from the basal layers of the epidermis to the cornified (horny) layer of the skin.
0044342	name:Name:type B pancreatic cell proliferation	name:Synonym:pancreatic B cell proliferation	name:Synonym:pancreatic beta cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of pancreatic B cells, resulting in the expansion of an pancreatic B cell population. Pancreatic B cell are cells of the pancreas that secrete insulin.
0048134	name:Name:germ-line cyst formation	info:Definition:Formation of a cluster of germ-line cells derived from a single founder cell.
0048135	name:Name:female germ-line cyst formation	info:Definition:Formation of a cluster of germ-line cells, in the female gonad, derived from a single founder cell. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030727	name:Name:germarium-derived female germ-line cyst formation	info:Definition:Formation of a cluster of germ-line cells, in the germarium, derived from a single founder cell (cystoblast). An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0048136	name:Name:male germ-line cyst formation	info:Definition:Formation of a cluster of germ-line cells, in the male gonad of an insect, derived from a single founder cell (cystoblast).
0048144	name:Name:fibroblast proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of fibroblast cells, resulting in the expansion of the fibroblast population.
0050673	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Epithelial cells make up the epithelium, the covering of internal and external surfaces of the body, including the lining of vessels and other small cavities. It consists of cells joined by small amounts of cementing substances.
0001935	name:Name:endothelial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of endothelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Endothelial cells are thin flattened cells which line the inside surfaces of body cavities, blood vessels, and lymph vessels, making up the endothelium.
0002043	name:Name:blood vessel endothelial cell proliferation involved in sprouting angiogenesis	name:Synonym:blood vessel endothelial cell proliferation during sprouting angiogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of blood vessel endothelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population contributing to sprouting angiogenesis.
0033598	name:Name:mammary gland epithelial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of mammary gland epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Mammary gland epithelial cells make up the covering of surfaces of the mammary gland. The mammary gland is a large compound sebaceous gland that in female mammals is modified to secrete milk.
0060650	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in mammary gland bud elongation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of mammary gland bud epithelial cells, resulting in the elongation of the bud.
0060750	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in mammary gland duct elongation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of mammary gland branch epithelial cells, resulting in the elongation of the branch. The mammary gland branch differs from the bud in that it is not the initial curved portion of the outgrowth.
0050674	name:Name:urothelial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of urothelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Urothelial cells make up a layer of transitional epithelium in the wall of the bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis, external to the lamina propria.
0060502	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the shaping of the lung.
0060505	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung bud dilation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells that contribute to the radial growth of a lung bud.
0060664	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in salivary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells of the submandibular salivary gland, resulting in the expansion of a cell population and the shaping of the gland.
0060767	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the progression of the prostate gland over time.
0060517	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in prostatic bud elongation	info:Definition:The multiplication of epithelial cells, contributing to the expansion of the primary prostatic bud.
0061331	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in Malpighian tubule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population and contributing to the shaping of a Malpighian tubule.
0072575	name:Name:epithelial cell proliferation involved in liver morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of epithelial cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the shaping of the liver.
0072574	name:Name:hepatocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of hepatocytes, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. Hepatocytes form the main structural component of the liver. They are specialized epithelial cells that are organized into interconnected plates called lobules.
0051450	name:Name:myoblast proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of myoblasts, resulting in the expansion of a myoblast cell population. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0014844	name:Name:myoblast cell proliferation involved in skeletal muscle regeneration	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of myoblast cells, resulting in the expansion of the cell population. This occurs as part of skeletal muscle regeneration. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0060011	name:Name:Sertoli cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of Sertoli cells, resulting in the expansion of the Sertoli cell population. A Sertoli cell is a supporting cell projecting inward from the basement membrane of seminiferous tubules.
0060722	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in embryonic placenta development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the embryonic placenta.
0060720	name:Name:spongiotrophoblast cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of spongiotrophoblast cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the spongiotrophoblast layer.
0061323	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0003249	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in heart valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells that contributes to the shaping of a heart valve.
0061325	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in outflow tract morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to the shaping of the outflow tract.
0061385	name:Name:fibroblast proliferation involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of fibroblasts, resulting in the expansion of a fibroblast population that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0061351	name:Name:neural precursor cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of neural precursor cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population. A neural precursor cell is either a nervous system stem cell or a nervous system progenitor cell.
0007405	name:Name:neuroblast proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a neuroblast population by cell division. A neuroblast is any cell that will divide and give rise to a neuron.
0010456	name:Name:cell proliferation in dorsal spinal cord	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the dorsal spinal cord cell population.
0021534	name:Name:cell proliferation in hindbrain	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population in the hindbrain.
0021923	name:Name:cell proliferation in hindbrain ventricular zone	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population in the hindbrain region that is adjacent to the ventricular cavity.
0021924	name:Name:cell proliferation in external granule layer	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of neuroblasts resulting in the expansion of a cell population in the external granule layer of the hindbrain. The external granule layer is the layer that originates from the rostral half of the rhombic lip in the first rhombomere.
0021846	name:Name:cell proliferation in forebrain	info:Definition:The creation of greater cell numbers in the forebrain due to cell division of progenitor cells.
0022012	name:Name:subpallium cell proliferation in forebrain	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of subpallium cells in the forebrain, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0022013	name:Name:pallium cell proliferation in forebrain	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of pallium cells in the forebrain, resulting in the expansion of the cell population.
0021992	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in neural plate elongation	info:Definition:The process of expansion of cell numbers in the neural plate due to cell division of progenitor cells preferentially in the rostrocaudal direction, resulting in the elongation of the tissue.
0022034	name:Name:rhombomere cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of rhombomere cells, resulting in the expansion of the cell population.
0033278	name:Name:cell proliferation in midbrain	name:Synonym:cell proliferation in mesencephalon	name:Synonym:mesencepahalic cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population in the midbrain.
0070444	name:Name:oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation	name:Synonym:oligodendrocyte precursor proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Oligodendrocyte progenitors give rise to oligodendrocytes, which form the insulating myelin sheath of axons in the central nervous system.
0070341	name:Name:fat cell proliferation	name:Synonym:adipocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:adipose cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of fat cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. A fat cell is an animal connective tissue cell specialized for the synthesis and storage of fat.
0070342	name:Name:brown fat cell proliferation	name:Synonym:brown adipocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:brown adipose cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of brown fat cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. A brown fat cell is a fat cell found the thermogenic form of adipose tissue found in newborns of many species.
0070343	name:Name:white fat cell proliferation	name:Synonym:white adipocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:white adipose cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of white fat cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population.
0070661	name:Name:leukocyte proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a leukocyte population by cell division.
0002158	name:Name:osteoclast proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of osteoclasts, resulting in the expansion of an osteoclast cell population. An osteoclast is a specialized phagocytic cell associated with the absorption and removal of the mineralized matrix of bone tissue, which typically differentiates from monocytes.
0032943	name:Name:mononuclear cell proliferation	name:Synonym:PBMC proliferation	name:Synonym:peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a mononuclear cell population by cell division. A mononuclear cell is a leukocyte with a single non-segmented nucleus in the mature form.
0070662	name:Name:mast cell proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a mast cell population by cell division.
0071335	name:Name:hair follicle cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of hair follicle cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population.
0071425	name:Name:hemopoietic stem cell proliferation	name:Synonym:hematopoietic stem cell proliferation	info:Definition:The expansion of a hemopoietic stem cell population by cell division. A hemopoietic stem cell is a stem cell from which all cells of the lymphoid and myeloid lineages develop.
0071838	name:Name:cell proliferation in bone marrow	name:Synonym:bone marrow cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population in the bone marrow.
0072089	name:Name:stem cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of stem cells, resulting in the expansion of a stem cell population. A stem cell is a cell that retains the ability to divide and proliferate throughout life to provide progenitor cells that can differentiate into specialized cells.
0072090	name:Name:mesenchymal stem cell proliferation involved in nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of mesenchymal stem cells, resulting in the expansion of a stem cell population, that contributes to the shaping of a nephron.
0072111	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in kidney development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the kidney.
0039015	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in pronephros development	name:Synonym:cell proliferation involved in pronephric kidney development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the pronephros.
0061209	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in mesonephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the mesonephros.
0061225	name:Name:mesonephric extraglomerular mesangial cell proliferation involved in mesonephros development	name:Synonym:mesonephric Goormaghtigh proliferation	name:Synonym:mesonephric lacis cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of extraglomerular glomerular mesangium cells in the mesonephros by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Extraglomerular mesangial cells (also known as lacis cells, Goormaghtigh cells) are light-staining cells in the kidney found outside the glomerulus, near the vascular pole and macula densa.
0061269	name:Name:mesonephric glomerular mesangial cell proliferation involved in mesonephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of glomerular mesangial cells in the mesonephros, resulting in the expansion of the population.
0072110	name:Name:glomerular mesangial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of glomerular mesangial cells, resulting in the expansion of the population.
0072123	name:Name:intraglomerular mesangial cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of intraglomerular glomerular mesangium cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Intraglomerular mesangial cells are specialized pericytes located among the glomerular capillaries within a renal corpuscle of a kidney. They are required for filtration, structural support and phagocytosis.
0072262	name:Name:metanephric glomerular mesangial cell proliferation involved in metanephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of glomerular mesangial cells in the metanephros, resulting in the expansion of the population.
0072122	name:Name:extraglomerular mesangial cell proliferation	name:Synonym:Goormaghtigh proliferation	name:Synonym:lacis cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of extraglomerular glomerular mesangium cells by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Extraglomerular mesangial cells (also known as lacis cells, Goormaghtigh cells) are light-staining cells in the kidney found outside the glomerulus, near the vascular pole and macula densa.
0072261	name:Name:metanephric extraglomerular mesangial cell proliferation involved in metanephros development	name:Synonym:metanephric Goormaghtigh proliferation	name:Synonym:metanephric lacis cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of extraglomerular glomerular mesangium cells in the metanephros by cell division, resulting in the expansion of their population. Extraglomerular mesangial cells (also known as lacis cells, Goormaghtigh cells) are light-staining cells in the kidney found outside the glomerulus, near the vascular pole and macula densa.
0072203	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in metanephros development	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of the population in the metanephros.
0072343	name:Name:pancreatic stellate cell proliferation	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of pancreatic stellate cells, resulting in the expansion of a pancreatic stellate cell population. Pancreatic stellate cells are found in the periacinar space of the exocrine pancreas and in perivascular and periductal regions of the pancreas, and have long cytoplasmic processes that encircle the base of the acinus.
0090255	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis	info:Definition:The multiplication or reproduction of cells, resulting in the expansion of a cell population that contributes to imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis.
2000793	name:Name:cell proliferation involved in heart valve development	name:Synonym:cell proliferation of cardiac valve development	name:Synonym:cell proliferation of heart valve development	info:Definition:Any cell proliferation that is involved in heart valve development.
0009758	name:Name:carbohydrate utilization	name:Synonym:sugar utilization	info:Definition:A series of processes that forms an integrated mechanism by which a cell or an organism detects the depletion of primary carbohydrate sources,usually glucose, and then activates genes to scavenge the last traces of the primary carbohydrate source and to transport and metabolize alternate carbohydrate sources. The utilization process begins when the cell or organism detects carbohydrate levels, includes the activation of genes whose products detect, transport or metabolize carbohydrates, and ends when the carbohydrate is incorporated into the cell or organism's metabolism.
0009987	name:Name:cellular process	name:Synonym:cell growth and/or maintenance	name:Synonym:cell physiology	name:Synonym:cellular physiological process	info:Definition:Any process that is carried out at the cellular level, but not necessarily restricted to a single cell. For example, cell communication occurs among more than one cell, but occurs at the cellular level.
0000910	name:Name:cytokinesis	info:Definition:A cellular process resulting in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell and its separation into two daughter cells. Cytokinesis usually occurs after growth, replication, and segregation of cellular components.
0033205	name:Name:cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinesis involved in cell cycle	info:Definition:Cytokinesis that occurs in the context of cell cycle progression and results in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell and its separation into two daughter cells.
0000281	name:Name:cytokinesis after mitosis	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that results in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell after mitosis, resulting in the separation of the original cell into two daughter cells.
0000911	name:Name:cytokinesis by cell plate formation	info:Definition:The process of dividing the cytoplasm of a parent cell where a structure forms in the cytoplasm and grows until reaching the plasma membrane, thereby completely separating the cytoplasms of adjacent progeny cells. An example of this is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010069	name:Name:zygote asymmetric cytokinesis in embryo sac	info:Definition:The division of the zygote in a plane perpendicular to the long axis of the embryo sac to produce a larger basal cell near the micropyle and a small terminal cell close to what was the central cell and is now the developing endosperm. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0033206	name:Name:cytokinesis after meiosis	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that results in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell after meiosis, resulting in the separation of the original cell into two daughter cells.
0001775	name:Name:cell activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0002266	name:Name:follicular dendritic cell activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a follicular dendritic cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0002268	name:Name:follicular dendritic cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a follicular dendritic cell.
0007343	name:Name:egg activation	info:Definition:The process in which the egg becomes metabolically active, initiates protein and DNA synthesis and undergoes structural changes to its cortex and/or cytoplasm.
0007407	name:Name:neuroblast activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a neuroblast resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0014719	name:Name:satellite cell activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a satellite cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand. Satellite cells are quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the muscle fiber, which are the main contributors to postnatal muscle growth. In adult muscle, satellite cells become activated to divide and differentiate in response to muscle damage.
0014901	name:Name:satellite cell activation involved in skeletal muscle regeneration	info:Definition:The process that initiates satellite cell division by causing it to move from quiescence to the G1 stage of the cell cycle. The cell swells and there are a number of other small changes. The cells then start to divide. Following cell division the cells will differentiate. Satellite cells are quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the muscle fiber, which are the main contributors to postnatal muscle growth. In adult muscle, satellite cells become activated to divide and differentiate in response to muscle damage.
0030168	name:Name:platelet activation	name:Synonym:blood coagulation, platelet activation	info:Definition:A series of progressive, overlapping events triggered by exposure of the platelets to subendothelial tissue. These events include shape change, adhesiveness, aggregation, and release reactions. When carried through to completion, these events lead to the formation of a stable hemostatic plug.
0032980	name:Name:keratinocyte activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a keratinocyte resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand. Upon activation, keratinocytes become migratory and hyperproliferative, and produce growth factors and cytokines.
0042118	name:Name:endothelial cell activation	info:Definition:The change in morphology and behavior of an endothelial cell resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0048143	name:Name:astrocyte activation	info:Definition:A change in morphology and behavior of an astrocyte resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, cellular ligand, or soluble factor.
0071892	name:Name:thrombocyte activation	name:Synonym:blood coagulation, thrombocyte activation	info:Definition:A cell activation process that occurs in thrombocytes and consists of a series of progressive, overlapping events including shape change, adhesiveness, and aggregation, which, when carried through to completion, lead to the formation of a stable hemostatic plug. Thrombocytes are nucleated cells found in non-mammalian vertebrates and are involved in hemostasis. They are the functional equivalent of the non-nucleated platelets found in mammals.
0072537	name:Name:fibroblast activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a fibroblast resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0035733	name:Name:hepatic stellate cell activation	info:Definition:A change in the morphology or behavior of a hepatic stellate cell resulting from exposure to a cytokine, chemokine, hormone, cellular ligand or soluble factor.
0003001	name:Name:generation of a signal involved in cell-cell signaling	name:Synonym:formation of a signal	name:Synonym:generation of a signal involved in cell-cell signalling	name:Synonym:signal generation	info:Definition:The cellular process that creates a physical entity or change in state, i.e. a signal, that originates in one cell and is used to transfer information to another cell. This process begins with the initial formation of the signal and ends with the mature form and placement of the signal.
0031130	name:Name:creation of an inductive signal	info:Definition:The process in which one cell or group of cells sends a signal over a short range to another cell or group of cells of different ancestry and developmental potential, thereby effecting a developmental change in the latter.
0060511	name:Name:creation of an inductive signal by a mesenchymal cell involved in lung induction	info:Definition:The process in which splanchnic mesenchymal cells send a signal over a short range to endodermal cells inducing them to form the primary lung bud.
0006276	name:Name:plasmid maintenance	info:Definition:The maintenance of the integrity of extrachromosomal plasmid DNA; includes processes that ensure plasmids are retained in the daughter cells after cell division.
0030541	name:Name:plasmid partitioning	info:Definition:Any process in which plasmids are segregated or distributed into daughter cells upon cell division.
0030543	name:Name:2-micrometer plasmid partitioning	info:Definition:The process in which copies of the 2-micrometer plasmid, found in fungi such as Saccharomyces, are distributed to daughter cells upon cell division.
0060908	name:Name:plasmid copy number maintenance	info:Definition:The maintenance of the number of copies of extrachromosomal plasmid DNA.
0006413	name:Name:translational initiation	name:Synonym:biopolymerisation	name:Synonym:biopolymerization	name:Synonym:protein synthesis initiation	name:Synonym:translation initiation	info:Definition:The process preceding formation of the peptide bond between the first two amino acids of a protein. This includes the formation of a complex of the ribosome, mRNA, and an initiation complex that contains the first aminoacyl-tRNA.
0002183	name:Name:cytoplasmic translational initiation	info:Definition:The process preceding formation of the peptide bond between the first two amino acids of a protein in the cytoplasm. This includes the formation of a complex of the ribosome, mRNA, and an initiation complex that contains the first aminoacyl-tRNA.
0002188	name:Name:translation reinitiation	info:Definition:A gene-specific translational control mechanism where the small ribosomal subunit remains attached to the mRNA following termination of translation, then resumes scanning on the same mRNA molecule and initiates again at a downstream start site. Reinitiation depends on de novo recruitment of the ternary complex that is required to recognize the next AUG codon.
0070124	name:Name:mitochondrial translational initiation	name:Synonym:mitochondrial translation initiation	info:Definition:The process preceding formation of the peptide bond between the first two amino acids of a protein in a mitochondrion. This includes the formation of a complex of the ribosome, mRNA, and an initiation complex that contains the first aminoacyl-tRNA.
0006903	name:Name:vesicle targeting	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes. Targeting involves coordinated interactions among cytoskeletal elements (microtubules or actin filaments), motor proteins, molecules at the vesicle membrane and target membrane surfaces, and vesicle cargo.
0016080	name:Name:synaptic vesicle targeting	info:Definition:The process in which synaptic vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes, mediated by molecules at the vesicle membrane and target membrane surfaces.
0045479	name:Name:vesicle targeting to fusome	name:Synonym:vesicle-fusome targeting	info:Definition:The recruitment of vesicles to the fusome. The vesicles become the fusome tubule network and are necessary for the assembly of the fusome.
0048199	name:Name:vesicle targeting, to, from or within Golgi	name:Synonym:dictyosome vesicle targeting	name:Synonym:Golgi vesicle targeting	name:Synonym:vesicle targeting, to, from or within dictyosome	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes during transport to, from or within the Golgi apparatus; mediated by the addition of specific coat proteins, including COPI and COPII proteins and clathrin, to the membrane during vesicle formation.
0048203	name:Name:vesicle targeting, trans-Golgi to endosome	name:Synonym:trans-Golgi to endosome targeting	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes during transport from the trans-Golgi to the endosome.
0048204	name:Name:vesicle targeting, inter-Golgi cisterna	name:Synonym:inter-Golgi cisterna targeting	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes during transport from one Golgi cisterna to another.
0048206	name:Name:vesicle targeting, cis-Golgi to rough ER	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough endoplasmic reticulum targeting	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough ER targeting	name:Synonym:vesicle targeting, cis-Golgi to rough endoplasmic reticulum	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes during transport from the cis-Golgi to the rough ER.
0048207	name:Name:vesicle targeting, rough ER to cis-Golgi	name:Synonym:rough endoplasmic reticulum to cis-Golgi targeting	name:Synonym:rough ER to cis-Golgi targeting	name:Synonym:vesicle targeting, rough endoplasmic reticulum to cis-Golgi	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles are directed to specific destination membranes during transport from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the cis-Golgi.
0048201	name:Name:vesicle targeting, plasma membrane to endosome	name:Synonym:plasma membrane to endosome targeting	info:Definition:The process in which vesicles formed at the plasma membrane are directed to specific destinations in endosome membranes, mediated by molecules at the vesicle membrane and target membrane surfaces.
0006928	name:Name:cellular component movement	name:Synonym:cell movement	name:Synonym:cellular component motion	info:Definition:The directed, self-propelled movement of a cellular component without the involvement of an external agent such as a transporter or a pore.
0003341	name:Name:cilium movement	name:Synonym:cilium beating	info:Definition:The directed, self-propelled movement of a cilium.
0003351	name:Name:epithelial cilium movement	name:Synonym:epithelial cilium beating	info:Definition:The directed, self-propelled movement of a cilium of an epithelial cell. This movement is usually coordinated between many epithelial cells, and serves to move fluid.
0060294	name:Name:cilium movement involved in cell motility	info:Definition:Movement of cilia mediated by motor proteins that contributes to the movement of a cell.
0048870	name:Name:cell motility	name:Synonym:cell locomotion	name:Synonym:cell movement	name:Synonym:movement of a cell	info:Definition:Any process involved in the controlled self-propelled movement of a cell that results in translocation of the cell from one place to another.
0001539	name:Name:ciliary or flagellar motility	name:Synonym:ciliary/flagellar motility	info:Definition:Cell motility due to movement of cilia or flagella.
0003411	name:Name:cell motility involved in camera-type eye morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the controlled self-propelled movement of a cell that results in translocation of the cell from one place to another and contributes to the physical shaping or formation of the camera-type eye.
0016477	name:Name:cell migration	info:Definition:The orderly movement of a cell from one site to another, often during the development of a multicellular organism or multicellular structure.
0021805	name:Name:cell movement involved in somal translocation	name:Synonym:cell motility involved in somal translocation	info:Definition:The movement of a cell body from the ventricular zone to the pial surface with a concomitant shortening of the process that extends to the pial surface.
0021814	name:Name:cell motility involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:cell locomotion involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	name:Synonym:cell locomotion involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	info:Definition:The movement of a cell along the process of a radial glial cell involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration.
0030317	name:Name:sperm motility	name:Synonym:sperm movement	info:Definition:Any process involved in the controlled movement of a sperm cell.
0043107	name:Name:type IV pilus-dependent motility	name:Synonym:social gliding motility	name:Synonym:TFP-dependent motility	name:Synonym:TFP-dependent movement	name:Synonym:twitching motility	name:Synonym:type 4 pilus-dependent motility	name:Synonym:type four pilus-dependent motility	info:Definition:Any process involved in the controlled movement of a bacterial cell which is dependent on the presence of type IV pili. Includes social gliding motility and twitching motility.
0061334	name:Name:cell rearrangement involved in Malpighian tubule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The movement of an epithelial cell with respect to other epithelial cells that contributes to the shaping of the Malpighian tubule.
0070358	name:Name:actin polymerization-dependent cell motility	name:Synonym:cell motility by actin tail formation	info:Definition:A process involved in the controlled movement of a bacterial cell powered by the continuous polymerization of actin at one pole of the cell.
0071975	name:Name:cell swimming	name:Synonym:cell swimming motility	info:Definition:Cell motility that results in the smooth movement of a cell through a liquid medium.
0071976	name:Name:cell gliding	name:Synonym:cell gliding motility	info:Definition:Cell motility that results in the smooth movement of a cell along a solid surface.
0090247	name:Name:cell motility involved in somitogenic axis elongation	info:Definition:Any process involved in the controlled self-propelled movement of a cell that contributes to somitogenic axis elongation.
0070983	name:Name:dendrite guidance	name:Synonym:dendritic guidance	info:Definition:The process in which the migration of a dendrite is directed to a specific target site in response to a combination of attractive and repulsive cues.
0006949	name:Name:syncytium formation	info:Definition:The formation of a syncytium, a mass of cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed within a single plasma membrane. Syncytia are normally derived from single cells that fuse or fail to complete cell division.
0000768	name:Name:syncytium formation by plasma membrane fusion	name:Synonym:cell fusion	name:Synonym:cell-cell fusion	info:Definition:The formation of a syncytium, a mass of cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed within a single plasma membrane, by the fusion of the plasma membranes of two or more individual cells.
0007520	name:Name:myoblast fusion	info:Definition:A process in which non-proliferating myoblasts fuse to existing fibers or to myotubes to form new fibers. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0034238	name:Name:macrophage fusion	info:Definition:The binding and fusion of a macrophage to one or more other cells to form a multinucleated cell.
0060140	name:Name:syncytium formation by plasma membrane fusion of virally targeted cells	info:Definition:The formation in a cell that has been targeted by a virus of a syncytium, a mass of cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed within a single plasma membrane, by the fusion of the plasma membranes of two or more individual cells.
0072675	name:Name:osteoclast fusion	info:Definition:The plasma membrane fusion process that results in fusion of mononuclear osteoclasts to form a multinuclear osteoclast.
0000769	name:Name:syncytium formation by mitosis without cytokinesis	name:Synonym:syncytium formation by mitosis without cell division	info:Definition:The formation of a syncytium, a mass of cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed within a single plasma membrane, by one or more rounds of nuclear division without cytokinesis.
0007017	name:Name:microtubule-based process	info:Definition:Any cellular process that depends upon or alters the microtubule cytoskeleton, that part of the cytoskeleton comprising microtubules and their associated proteins.
0000072	name:Name:M phase specific microtubule process	name:Synonym:M-phase specific microtubule process	info:Definition:A microtubule-based process that occurs only during M phase of the cell cycle.
0000226	name:Name:microtubule cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:microtubule cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:microtubule dynamics	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising microtubules and their associated proteins.
0001578	name:Name:microtubule bundle formation	name:Synonym:microtubule bundling	info:Definition:A process that results in a parallel arrangement of microtubules.
0007020	name:Name:microtubule nucleation	info:Definition:The 'de novo' formation of a microtubule, in which tubulin heterodimers form metastable oligomeric aggregates, some of which go on to support formation of a complete microtubule. Microtubule nucleation usually occurs from a specific site within a cell.
0007051	name:Name:spindle organization	name:Synonym:spindle organisation	name:Synonym:spindle organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the spindle, the array of microtubules and associated molecules that forms between opposite poles of a eukaryotic cell during DNA segregation and serves to move the duplicated chromosomes apart.
0010245	name:Name:radial microtubular system formation	info:Definition:Formation of radial microtubular systems during male meiotic cytokinesis in plants.
0021815	name:Name:modulation of microtubule cytoskeleton involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:modulation of microtubule cytoskeleton involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:Rearrangements of the microtubule cytoskeleton that contribute to the movement of cells along radial glial cells as a component of the process of cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration.
0030951	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of microtubule cytoskeleton polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of polarized microtubule-based cytoskeletal structures.
0031109	name:Name:microtubule polymerization or depolymerization	info:Definition:Assembly or disassembly of microtubules by the addition or removal of tubulin heterodimers from a microtubule.
0031121	name:Name:equatorial microtubule organization	name:Synonym:equatorial microtubule organisation	name:Synonym:equatorial microtubule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of structures formed of microtubules and associated proteins at the midpoint of a cell.
0031122	name:Name:cytoplasmic microtubule organization	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic microtubule organisation	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic microtubule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of structures formed of microtubules and associated proteins in the cytoplasm of a cell.
0032118	name:Name:horsetail-astral microtubule organization	name:Synonym:horsetail-astral microtubule array organization	name:Synonym:horsetail-astral microtubule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the horsetail-astral array, a structure of astral microtubules that emanates from the spindle pole body during meiosis.
0034453	name:Name:microtubule anchoring	info:Definition:Any process in which a microtubule is maintained in a specific location in a cell.
0035044	name:Name:sperm aster formation	info:Definition:Formation and organization of an aster composed of microtubule arrays originating from the sperm basal body and extending virtually to the egg periphery. The sperm aster ensures the appropriate positioning of the male and female pronuclei.
0051293	name:Name:establishment of spindle localization	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle localisation	name:Synonym:spindle positioning	info:Definition:The directed movement of the spindle to a specific location in the cell.
0080175	name:Name:phragmoplast microtubule organization	name:Synonym:phragmoplast microtubule cytoskeleton organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of structures formed of microtubules and associated proteins in phragmoplast, a plant cell specific structure that forms during late cytokinesis. Phragmoplast serves as a scaffold for cell plate assembly and subsequent formation of a new cell wall separating the two daughter cells.
0090172	name:Name:microtubule cytoskeleton organization involved in synapsis	name:Synonym:microtubule organization involved in chromosome pairing	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising microtubules and their associated proteins that contributes to chromosomal pairing.
0090176	name:Name:microtubule cytoskeleton organization involved in establishment of planar polarity	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising microtubules and their associated proteins and contributes to the establishment of planar polarity.
0007018	name:Name:microtubule-based movement	info:Definition:A microtubule-based process that is mediated by motor proteins and results in the movement of organelles, other microtubules, or other particles along microtubules.
0010970	name:Name:microtubule-based transport	info:Definition:Microtubule-based movement that results in the net, directed movement of organelles or other particles from one location in the cell to another.
0051012	name:Name:microtubule sliding	name:Synonym:microtubule translocation	info:Definition:The movement of one microtubule along another microtubule.
0007099	name:Name:centriole replication	name:Synonym:centriole duplication	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which a daughter centriole is formed perpendicular to an existing centriole. An immature centriole contains a ninefold radially symmetric array of single microtubules; mature centrioles consist of a radial array of nine microtubule triplets, doublets, or singlets depending upon the species and cell type.
0008103	name:Name:oocyte microtubule cytoskeleton polarization	info:Definition:Establishment and maintenance of a specific axis of polarity of the oocyte microtubule network. The axis is set so that the minus and plus ends of the microtubules of the mid stage oocyte are positioned along the anterior cortex and at the posterior pole, respectively. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0032121	name:Name:attachment of telomeres to spindle pole body	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which physical connections are formed between telomeres and the spindle pole body, facilitating bouquet formation.
0034643	name:Name:establishment of mitochondrion localization, microtubule-mediated	name:Synonym:establishment of mitochondrion localisation, microtubule-mediated	name:Synonym:microtubule-mediated mitochondrion localization	name:Synonym:mitochondrial localization, microtubule-mediated	info:Definition:The directed movement of the mitochondrion to a specific location, by a process involving microtubules.
0034640	name:Name:establishment of mitochondrion localization by microtubule attachment	name:Synonym:establishment of mitochondrion localisation by microtubule attachment	name:Synonym:mitochondrial localization by microtubule attachment	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration by microtubule attachment	name:Synonym:mitochondrion migration by microtubule attachment	info:Definition:The directed movement of a mitochondrion by attachment to a microtubule, followed by elongation of the microtubule by tubulin polymerization.
0047497	name:Name:mitochondrion transport along microtubule	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration along microtubule	name:Synonym:mitochondrial transport along microtubule	info:Definition:The directed movement of a mitochondrion along a microtubule, mediated by motor proteins.
0051013	name:Name:microtubule severing	name:Synonym:microtubule severing activity	info:Definition:The process in which a microtubule is broken down into smaller segments.
0051231	name:Name:spindle elongation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the distance is lengthened between poles of the spindle.
0000022	name:Name:mitotic spindle elongation	name:Synonym:spindle elongation during mitosis	info:Definition:Lengthening of the distance between poles of the mitotic spindle.
0051232	name:Name:meiotic spindle elongation	name:Synonym:spindle elongation during meiosis	info:Definition:The lengthening of the distance between poles of the spindle during a meiotic cell cycle.
0051255	name:Name:spindle midzone assembly	name:Synonym:spindle midzone biogenesis	name:Synonym:spindle midzone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spindle midzone formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the spindle midzone. The spindle midzone is the area in the center of the spindle where the spindle microtubules from opposite poles overlap.
0051256	name:Name:spindle midzone assembly involved in mitosis	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle midzone assembly	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle midzone biogenesis	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle midzone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle midzone formation	name:Synonym:spindle midzone biogenesis involved in mitosis	name:Synonym:spindle midzone formation involved in mitosis	info:Definition:The formation of the spindle midzone, the area in the center of the spindle where the spindle microtubules from opposite poles overlap, as a part of the process of mitosis.
0051257	name:Name:spindle midzone assembly involved in meiosis	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle midzone assembly	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle midzone biogenesis	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle midzone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle midzone formation	name:Synonym:spindle midzone biogenesis involved in meiosis	name:Synonym:spindle midzone biosynthesis involved in meiosis	name:Synonym:spindle midzone formation involved in meiosis	info:Definition:The formation of the spindle midzone, the area in the center of the spindle where the spindle microtubules from opposite poles overlap, as a part of the process of meiosis.
0060152	name:Name:microtubule-based peroxisome localization	name:Synonym:microtubule-based peroxisome localisation	info:Definition:The microtubule-based process in which a peroxisome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location. A peroxisome is a small membrane-bounded organelle that uses dioxygen (O2) to oxidize organic molecules.
0007049	name:Name:cell cycle	name:Synonym:cell-division cycle	info:Definition:The progression of biochemical and morphological phases and events that occur in a cell during successive cell replication or nuclear replication events. Canonically, the cell cycle comprises the replication and segregation of genetic material followed by the division of the cell, but in endocycles or syncytial cells nuclear replication or nuclear division may not be followed by cell division.
0000278	name:Name:mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Progression through the phases of the mitotic cell cycle, the most common eukaryotic cell cycle, which canonically comprises four successive phases called G1, S, G2, and M and includes replication of the genome and the subsequent segregation of chromosomes into daughter cells. In some variant cell cycles nuclear replication or nuclear division may not be followed by cell division, or G1 and G2 phases may be absent.
0007113	name:Name:endomitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:endomitosis	info:Definition:A mitotic cell cycle in which chromosomes are replicated and sister chromatids separate, but spindle formation, nuclear membrane breakdown and nuclear division do not occur, resulting in an increased number of chromosomes in the cell.
0016330	name:Name:second mitotic wave involved in compound eye morphogenesis	name:Synonym:second mitotic wave during compound eye morphogenesis	info:Definition:A discrete cell cycle in the third instar eye imaginal disc after progression of the morphogenetic furrow that contributes to compound eye morphogenesis. It is essential for generation of a sufficient pool of uncommitted cells to develop complete ommatidia.
0033277	name:Name:abortive mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:abortive mitosis	info:Definition:A cell cycle in which mitosis is begun and progresses normally through the end of anaphase, but not completed, resulting in a cell with increased ploidy.
0033301	name:Name:cell cycle comprising mitosis without cytokinesis	info:Definition:A mitotic cell cycle in which mitosis is completed but cytokinesis does not occur, resulting in a cell containing multiple nuclei each with a chromosomal complement of the original ploidy (usually 2N).
0045448	name:Name:mitotic cell cycle, embryonic	info:Definition:The eukaryotic cell cycle in which a cell is duplicated without changing ploidy, occurring in the embryo.
0051321	name:Name:meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Progression through the phases of the meiotic cell cycle, in which canonically a cell replicates to produce four offspring with half the chromosomal content of the progenitor cell.
0048236	name:Name:plant-type spore development	name:Synonym:plant spore development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the spore over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The spore gives rise to gametophytes.
0007059	name:Name:chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:chromosome division	name:Synonym:chromosome transmission	info:Definition:The process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized into specific structures and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets. In eukaryotes, chromosome segregation begins with the alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate, includes chromosome separation, and ends when chromosomes have completed movement to the spindle poles.
0000819	name:Name:sister chromatid segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which sister chromatids are organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets.
0000070	name:Name:mitotic sister chromatid segregation	name:Synonym:mitotic chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:mitotic sister-chromatid adhesion release	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which replicated homologous chromosomes are organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two sets during the mitotic cell cycle. Each replicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids, aligns at the cell equator, paired with its homologous partner. One homolog of each morphologic type goes into each of the resulting chromosome sets.
0045144	name:Name:meiotic sister chromatid segregation	name:Synonym:meiosis II, chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which sister chromatids are organized and then physically separated and randomly apportioned to two sets during the second division of the meiotic cell cycle.
0045132	name:Name:meiotic chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized into specific structures and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets during M phase of the meiotic cell cycle.
0007060	name:Name:male meiosis chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets during the meiotic cell cycle in a male.
0016321	name:Name:female meiosis chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets during the meiotic cell cycle in a female.
0032837	name:Name:distributive segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets during a normally chiasmate meiosis under the condition that chiasma have not occurred between a particular pair of homologs. Distributive segregation is a \"backup\" mechanism to ensure the segregation of homologs that have failed to cross over - either as a consequence of mutation or not, as, for example, the 4th chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster (which never exchanges, presumably due to its small size) - but nevertheless segregate normally.
0045143	name:Name:homologous chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:meiosis I, chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which replicated homologous chromosomes are organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two sets during the first division of the meiotic cell cycle. Each replicated chromosome, composed of two sister chromatids, aligns at the cell equator, paired with its homologous partner; this pairing off, referred to as synapsis, permits genetic recombination. One homolog (both sister chromatids) of each morphologic type goes into each of the resulting chromosome sets.
0090142	name:Name:mitochondrial chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The process in which genetic material of the mitochondrion, in the form of the mitochondrial chromosome, is organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets.
0007154	name:Name:cell communication	info:Definition:Any process that mediates interactions between a cell and its surroundings. Encompasses interactions such as signaling or attachment between one cell and another cell, between a cell and an extracellular matrix, or between a cell and any other aspect of its environment.
0000756	name:Name:response to pheromone involved in conjugation with mutual genetic exchange	name:Synonym:response to pheromone involved in conjugation without cellular fusion	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pheromone stimulus during the process of conjugation without cellular fusion.
0000760	name:Name:adaptation to pheromone involved in conjugation with mutual genetic exchange	name:Synonym:adaptation to pheromone involved conjugation without cellular fusion	name:Synonym:desensitization to pheromone during conjugation without cellular fusion	info:Definition:In organisms that undergo conjugation without cellular fusion, the process resulting in desensitization following exposure to pheromone stimulus that act to down-regulate further stimulation or block initial conjugation responses.
0007267	name:Name:cell-cell signaling	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another.
0003131	name:Name:mesodermal-endodermal cell signaling	name:Synonym:mesodermal-endodermal cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from mesodermal cells to endodermal cells.
0003133	name:Name:endodermal-mesodermal cell signaling	name:Synonym:endodermal-mesodermal cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from endodermal cells to mesodermal cells.
0003385	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in amphid sensory organ development	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in amphid sensory organ development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another and contributes to the progression of an amphid sensory organ over time, from its formation to the mature state.
0007268	name:Name:synaptic transmission	name:Synonym:neurotransmission	name:Synonym:regulation of synapse	name:Synonym:signal transmission across a synapse	info:Definition:The process of communication from a neuron to a target (neuron, muscle, or secretory cell) across a synapse.
0007495	name:Name:visceral mesoderm-endoderm interaction involved in midgut development	name:Synonym:visceral mesoderm/endoderm interaction	info:Definition:The process of cell-cell signaling between visceral mesoderm cells and endoderm cells that is involved in the differentiation of cells in the midgut.
0007499	name:Name:ectoderm and mesoderm interaction	name:Synonym:ectoderm/mesoderm interaction	info:Definition:A cell-cell signaling process occurring between the two gastrulation-generated layers of the ectoderm and the mesoderm.
0010699	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in quorum sensing	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in quorum sensing	info:Definition:The cell-cell signaling process in which single-celled organisms monitor population density by detecting the concentration of small diffusible signal molecules.
0016204	name:Name:determination of muscle attachment site	info:Definition:The process that mediates the transfer of information from the cells of a muscle to those of its intended target, thereby identifying the target site.
0021937	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell-granule cell precursor cell signaling involved in regulation of granule cell precursor cell proliferation	name:Synonym:Purkinje cell-granule cell precursor cell signalling involved in regulation of granule cell precursor cell proliferation	info:Definition:The process that mediates the transfer of information from Purkinje cells to granule cell precursors resulting in an increase in rate of granule cell precursor cell proliferation.
0035425	name:Name:autocrine signaling	name:Synonym:autocrine signalling	info:Definition:Signaling between cells of the same type. The signal produced by the signaling cell binds to a receptor on, and affects a cell of the same type.
0038001	name:Name:paracrine signaling	name:Synonym:paracrine signalling	info:Definition:The transfer of information from one cell to another, where the signal travels from the signal-producing cell to the receiving cell by passive diffusion or bulk flow in intercellular fluid. The signaling cell and the receiving cell are usually in the vicinity of each other.
0038002	name:Name:endocrine signaling	name:Synonym:endocrine signalling	info:Definition:The transfer of information from one cell to another, where an endocrine hormone is transported from the signal-producing cell to the receiving cell via the circulatory system (via blood, lymph or cerebrospinal fluid). The signaling cell and the receiving cell are often distant to each other.
0044345	name:Name:stromal-epithelial cell signaling involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:stromal-epithelial cell signalling involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:The process of transferring information from a stromal cell to an epithelial cell where it is received and interpreted, as part of prostate gland development.
0045168	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:cell fate commitment, cell-cell signaling	name:Synonym:cell fate commitment, cell-cell signalling	name:Synonym:cell-cell signaling involved in cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:cell-cell signaling resulting in cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling during cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in cell fate specification	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling resulting in cell fate commitment	info:Definition:Signaling at long or short range between cells that results in the commitment of a cell to a certain fate.
0060495	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in lung development	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in lung development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another and contributes to the progression of the lung, from its initial state to the mature structure.
0060638	name:Name:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signaling	name:Synonym:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from a mesenchymal cell to an epithelial cell where it is received and interpreted.
0060656	name:Name:regulation of branching involved in mammary cord morphogenesis by fat precursor cell-epithelial cell signaling	name:Synonym:regulation of branching involved in mammary cord morphogenesis by fat precursor cell-epithelial cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of branching of the mammary gland cord as a result of a signal being created by a mammary fat precursor cell and its subsequent reception and interpretation by a mammary cord epithelial cell.
0060657	name:Name:regulation of mammary gland cord elongation by mammary fat precursor cell-epithelial cell signaling	name:Synonym:regulation of mammary gland cord elongation by mammary fat precursor cell-epithelial cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of mammary gland cord elongation as a result of a signal being created by a mesenchymal cell that is a precursor to the mammary fat and its subsequent reception and interpretation by an mammary cord epithelial cell.
0060673	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in placenta development	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in placenta development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another.
0060684	name:Name:epithelial-mesenchymal cell signaling	name:Synonym:epithelial-mesenchymal cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that results in the transfer of information from an epithelial cell to a mesenchymal cell where it is interpreted.
0060764	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in mammary gland development	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in mammary gland development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another and contributes to the progression of the mammary gland, from its initial state to the mature structure.
0060802	name:Name:epiblast cell-extraembryonic ectoderm cell signaling involved in anterior/posterior axis specification	name:Synonym:epiblast cell-extraembryonic ectoderm cell signalling involved in anterior/posterior axis specification	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from an epiblast cell to an extraembryonic ectoderm cell that contributes to the specification of the anterior/posterior axis.
0060995	name:Name:cell-cell signaling involved in kidney development	name:Synonym:cell-cell signalling involved in kidney development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another and contributes to the progression of the kidney over time, from its formation to the mature organ.
0072043	name:Name:regulation of pre-tubular aggregate formation by cell-cell signaling	name:Synonym:regulation of pre-tubular aggregate formation by cell-cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from one cell to another that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of pre-tubular aggregate formation. Pre-tubular aggregate formation is the cell adhesion process in which mammary mesenchyme cells adhere to one another in the initial stages of the formation of the pre-tubular aggregate, the earliest recognizable structure of the kidney.
0007412	name:Name:axon target recognition	info:Definition:The process in which an axon recognizes and binds to a set of cells with which it may form stable connections.
0007543	name:Name:sex determination, somatic-gonadal interaction	name:Synonym:sex determination, somatic/gonadal interaction	info:Definition:The process that mediates the interactions between somatic cells and gonadal cells that ultimately results in the specification of sexual status of the organism.
0009875	name:Name:pollen-pistil interaction	info:Definition:The interaction between a pollen grain and pistil.
0010643	name:Name:cell communication by chemical coupling	info:Definition:The process that mediates signaling interactions between one cell and another cell by the transfer of small, water-soluble molecules or metabolites between their adjacent cytoplasms via intercellular protein channels.
0010644	name:Name:cell communication by electrical coupling	info:Definition:The process that mediates signaling interactions between one cell and another cell by transfer of current between their adjacent cytoplasms via intercellular protein channels.
0021807	name:Name:motogenic signaling initiating cell movement in cerebral cortex	name:Synonym:motogenic signalling initiating cell movement in the cerebral cortex	info:Definition:The interaction of soluble factors and receptors that result in the movement of cells in the primitive cerebral cortex.
0021809	name:Name:neurotrophic factor signaling initiating cell movement, involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:neurotrophic factor signalling initiating cell movement, involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:Signaling between members of the neurotrophin family and their receptors that result in the start of cell motility as a component of the process of cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration.
0021810	name:Name:neurotransmitter signaling initiating cell movement, involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter signalling initiating cell movement, involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:Signaling by neurotransmitters and their receptors that results in the initiation of movement of cells as a component of the process of glial-mediated radial migration.
0021811	name:Name:growth factor signaling initiating cell movement involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:growth factor signaling initiating cell movement involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	name:Synonym:growth factor signalling initiating cell movement involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:Signaling between growth factors and their receptors that results in the start of cell movement, where this process is involved in glial-mediated radial migration in the cerebral cortex.
0021837	name:Name:motogenic signaling involved in postnatal olfactory bulb interneuron migration	name:Synonym:motogenic signalling involved in postnatal olfactory bulb interneuron migration	info:Definition:The signaling that results in the stimulation of cell movement in the rostral migratory stream.
0021838	name:Name:motogenic signaling involved in interneuron migration from the subpallium to the cortex	name:Synonym:motogenic signalling involved in interneuron migration from the subpallium to the cortex	info:Definition:The creation and reception of signals that result in the directional movement of interneuron precursors from the subpallium to the cortex.
0031668	name:Name:cellular response to extracellular stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an extracellular stimulus.
0009432	name:Name:SOS response	info:Definition:An error-prone process for repairing damaged microbial DNA.
0030420	name:Name:establishment of competence for transformation	info:Definition:The process in which a naturally transformable bacterium acquires the ability to take up exogenous DNA. This term should be applied only to naturally transformable bacteria, and should not be used in the context of artificially induced bacterial transformation.
0031131	name:Name:reception of an inductive signal	info:Definition:The process in which one cell or group of cells receives, transduces, and responds to a signal generated by another cell or group of cells of different ancestry and developmental potential, such that the recipient cell(s) undergo a developmental change.
0031669	name:Name:cellular response to nutrient levels	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus reflecting the presence, absence, or concentration of nutrients.
0042262	name:Name:DNA protection	info:Definition:Any process in which DNA is protected from damage by, for example, oxidative stress.
0042631	name:Name:cellular response to water deprivation	name:Synonym:cellular response to drought	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of deprivation of water.
0071460	name:Name:cellular response to cell-matrix adhesion	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of cell-matrix adhesion.
0035426	name:Name:extracellular matrix-cell signaling	name:Synonym:cell-extracellular matrix signalling	name:Synonym:extracellular matrix-cell signaling	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information between the extracellular matrix and a cell.
0021939	name:Name:extracellular matrix-granule cell signaling involved in regulation of granule cell precursor proliferation	name:Synonym:extracellular matrix-granule cell signalling involved in regulation of granule cell precursor proliferation	info:Definition:The process that mediates the transfer of information from the extracellular matrix to granule cell precursors resulting in a decrease in rate of granule cell precursor cell proliferation.
0060668	name:Name:regulation of branching involved in salivary gland morphogenesis by extracellular matrix-epithelial cell signaling	name:Synonym:regulation of branching involved in salivary gland morphogenesis by extracellular matrix-epithelial cell signalling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of salivary gland branching as a result of the transfer of information from the extracellular matrix to the epithelium of the salivary gland.
0060883	name:Name:regulation of basal lamina disassembly involved in semicircular canal fusion by cell communication	info:Definition:Any process that mediates interactions between a cell and its surroundings that modulates of the rate, frequency or extent of basal lamina disassembly involved in semicircular canal fusion.
0007155	name:Name:cell adhesion	name:Synonym:cell adhesion molecule activity	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix, via cell adhesion molecules.
0003392	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in retrograde extension	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix that contributes to the process of retrograde extension.
0003394	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in dendrite retrograde extension	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix that contributes to the process of retrograde extension of a dendrite.
0016337	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via adhesion molecules.
0000761	name:Name:conjugant formation	info:Definition:During conjugation without cellular fusion, the process that results in pairing complementary mating types. Localized morphological, cytological, and cytoskeletal changes connect the mating types without cytoplasmic mixing.
0001502	name:Name:cartilage condensation	info:Definition:The condensation of mesenchymal cells that have been committed to differentiate into chondrocytes.
0003274	name:Name:endocardial cushion fusion	info:Definition:The cell-cell adhesion process of mesenchymal cardiac cushion cells that contributes to the process of cushion shaping.
0003317	name:Name:cardioblast cell midline fusion	name:Synonym:cardiac progenitor cell midline fusion	info:Definition:The attachment of cardiac progenitor cells to one another that contributes to the formation of the heart rudiment.
0003367	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in ameboidal cell migration	info:Definition:The attachment of one ameboid cell to another that contributes to the establishment of cell polarity that is part of the directed movement of one of the cells.
0007156	name:Name:homophilic cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of an adhesion molecule in one cell to an identical molecule in an adjacent cell.
0007157	name:Name:heterophilic cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:agglutination	info:Definition:The attachment of an adhesion molecule in one cell to a nonidentical adhesion molecule in an adjacent cell.
0007158	name:Name:neuron cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:neuron adhesion	name:Synonym:neuronal cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a neuron to another cell via adhesion molecules.
0007159	name:Name:leukocyte cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:leukocyte adhesion	name:Synonym:leukocyte cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a leukocyte to another cell via adhesion molecules.
0007299	name:Name:ovarian follicle cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:follicle cell adhesion	name:Synonym:ovarian follicle cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a somatic follicle cell to another somatic follicle cell or to its substratum, the germline cells. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0009865	name:Name:pollen tube adhesion	info:Definition:The process in which the pollen tube adheres to cells of the stigma and style.
0009876	name:Name:pollen adhesion	info:Definition:The process in which pollen deposited on the stigma adheres to cells of the stigma.
0016338	name:Name:calcium-independent cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:calcium-independent cell adhesion molecule activity	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via adhesion molecules that do not require the presence of calcium for the interaction.
0016339	name:Name:calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion	name:Synonym:calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecule activity	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via adhesion molecules that require the presence of calcium for the interaction.
0021812	name:Name:neuronal-glial interaction involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:neuronal-glial interaction involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:The changes in adhesion between neuronal cells and glial cells as a component of the process of cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial cell migration.
0021813	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in neuronal-glial interactions involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:cell-cell adhesion involved in neuronal-glial interactions involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:The interaction between two cells that modulates the association of a neuronal cell and a glial cell involved in glial-mediated radial cell migration in the cerebral cortex.
0021832	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in cerebral cortex tangential migration using cell-cell interactions	info:Definition:The attachment of cells to one another to form groups of cells involved in cerebral cortex tangential migration.
0021944	name:Name:neuronal-glial interaction involved in hindbrain glial-mediated radial cell migration	info:Definition:The changes in adhesion between a neuronal cell and a glial cell as a component of the process of hindbrain glial-mediated radial cell migration.
0033631	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion mediated by integrin	name:Synonym:cell-cell adhesion mediated by integrin complex 	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via an integrin, a heterodimeric adhesion receptor formed by the non-covalent association of particular alpha and beta subunits.
0034109	name:Name:homotypic cell-cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to a second cell of the identical type via adhesion molecules.
0034113	name:Name:heterotypic cell-cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to a cell of a different type via adhesion molecules.
0043689	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in flocculation	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via adhesion molecules, occurring as a part of the non-sexual aggregation of single-celled organisms.
0044331	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion mediated by cadherin	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via a cadherin, transmembrane proteins having repeating extracellular calcium ion binding domains.
0052000	name:Name:Type IV pili-dependent aggregation	name:Synonym:auto-aggregation	name:Synonym:bfp-dependent aggregation	name:Synonym:bundle-forming fimbriae-dependent aggregation	name:Synonym:bundle-forming pili-dependent aggregation	name:Synonym:tfp-dependent aggregation	info:Definition:The formation of bacterial aggregates in liquid culture dependent on the presence of Type IV pili.
0060607	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in sealing an epithelial fold	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell along the edges of two epithelial folds, giving rise to the lumen of an epithelial tube.
0060647	name:Name:mesenchymal cell condensation involved in mammary fat development	info:Definition:The cell adhesion process in which mammary mesenchyme cells adhere to one another in the initial stages of the formation of mammary fat development.
0060710	name:Name:chorio-allantoic fusion	info:Definition:The cell-cell adhesion process in which the cells of the chorion fuse to the cells of the allantois.
0070586	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in gastrulation	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell affecting gastrulation.
0072035	name:Name:pre-tubular aggregate formation	name:Synonym:mesenchymal cell condensation involved in renal vesicle formation	name:Synonym:nephron epithelium formation	info:Definition:The cell adhesion process in which mesenchyme cells adhere to one another in the initial stages of the formation of the pre-tubular aggregate, the earliest recognizable structure of the kidney.
0090125	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in synapse maturation	name:Synonym:trans-synaptic adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of the pre-synaptic cell to the post-synaptic cell via adhesion molecules that contributes to synapse maturation.
0090136	name:Name:epithelial cell-cell adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of an epithelial cell to another epithelial cell via adhesion molecules.
0090138	name:Name:regulation of actin cytoskeleton organization by cell-cell adhesion	info:Definition:Any cell-cell adhesion process that modulates the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising actin filaments and their associated proteins.
0090250	name:Name:cell-cell adhesion involved in establishment of planar polarity	info:Definition:The attachment of one cell to another cell via adhesion molecules that contributes to the establishment of planar cell polarity.
0031589	name:Name:cell-substrate adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to the underlying substrate via adhesion molecules.
0006931	name:Name:substrate-dependent cell migration, cell attachment to substrate	name:Synonym:substrate-bound cell migration, cell attachment to substrate	info:Definition:The formation of adhesions that stabilize protrusions at the leading edge of a migrating cell; involves integrin activation, clustering, and the recruitment of structural and signaling components to nascent adhesions.
0007160	name:Name:cell-matrix adhesion	info:Definition:The binding of a cell to the extracellular matrix via adhesion molecules.
0021833	name:Name:cell-matrix adhesion involved in tangential migration using cell-cell interactions	info:Definition:The interaction of a cell and the extracellular matrix involved in the directed tangential movement of cells mediated by cell-cell interactions in the developing cerebral cortex.
0021839	name:Name:interneuron-substratum interaction involved in interneuron migration from the subpallium to the cortex	info:Definition:The process in which migrating interneurons interact with an external substratum as a component of migration from the subpallium to the cortex.
0034446	name:Name:substrate adhesion-dependent cell spreading	name:Synonym:cell spreading during cell substrate adhesion	name:Synonym:substrate adhesion dependent cell spreading	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process that results in flattening of a cell as a consequence of its adhesion to a substrate.
0033627	name:Name:cell adhesion mediated by integrin	name:Synonym:cell adhesion mediated by integrin complex	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix, via an integrin, a heterodimeric adhesion receptor formed by the non-covalent association of particular alpha and beta subunits.
0043708	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in biofilm formation	name:Synonym:cell adhesion during biofilm formation	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to a surface, via cell adhesion molecules, contributing to the formation of a biofilm.
0043709	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in single-species biofilm formation	name:Synonym:cell adhesion during single-species biofilm formation	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to a surface, via cell adhesion molecules, during the formation of a biofilm composed of microorganisms of the same species.
0043710	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in multi-species biofilm formation	name:Synonym:cell adhesion during multi-species biofilm formation	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell to a surface, via cell adhesion molecules, contributing to the formation of a biofilm composed of microorganisms of different species.
0060519	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in prostatic bud elongation	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix, via cell adhesion molecules that contributes to the elongation of the primary prostatic bud.
0061343	name:Name:cell adhesion involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell, either to another cell or to an underlying substrate such as the extracellular matrix, via cell adhesion molecules that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0007163	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of cell polarity	name:Synonym:establishment and/or maintenance of cell polarity	name:Synonym:establishment and/or maintenance of cell polarization	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of anisotropic intracellular organization or cell growth patterns.
0016332	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of polarity of embryonic epithelium	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of anisotropic intracellular organization of epithelial cells in an embryo.
0042250	name:Name:maintenance of polarity of embryonic epithelium	info:Definition:The maintenance of an established polarized embryonic epithelial sheet.
0016334	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of polarity of follicular epithelium	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a polarized follicular epithelial sheet.
0008069	name:Name:dorsal/ventral axis specification, ovarian follicular epithelium	name:Synonym:dorsal-ventral axis specification, ovarian follicular epithelium	name:Synonym:dorsal/ventral axis determination, follicular epithelium	name:Synonym:dorsal/ventral axis determination, ovarian follicular epithelium	name:Synonym:dorsoventral axis specification, ovarian follicular epithelium	info:Definition:Polarization of the ovarian follicle cells along the dorsal/ventral axis. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030714	name:Name:anterior/posterior axis specification, follicular epithelium	name:Synonym:anterior/posterior axis determination, follicular epithelium	info:Definition:Polarization of the follicle cells of an insect ovary along the anterior/posterior axis.
0042247	name:Name:establishment of planar polarity of follicular epithelium	info:Definition:Coordinated organization of groups of cells in the plane of a follicular epithelium, such that they all orient to similar coordinates.
0042248	name:Name:maintenance of polarity of follicular epithelium	info:Definition:The maintenance of an established polarized follicular epithelial sheet.
0016336	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of polarity of larval imaginal disc epithelium	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a polarized larval imaginal disc epithelium.
0042251	name:Name:maintenance of polarity of larval imaginal disc epithelium	info:Definition:The maintenance of an established polarized larval imaginal disc epithelium.
0030010	name:Name:establishment of cell polarity	name:Synonym:bud site selection/establishment of cell polarity	name:Synonym:cell polarization	info:Definition:The specification and formation of anisotropic intracellular organization or cell growth patterns.
0000282	name:Name:cellular bud site selection	name:Synonym:bud site selection/establishment of cell polarity	info:Definition:The specification of the site where a daughter cell will form, in organisms that reproduce by budding. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0001767	name:Name:establishment of lymphocyte polarity	name:Synonym:lymphocyte polarization	info:Definition:The directed orientation of lymphocyte signaling molecules and associated membrane rafts towards a chemokine gradient or a contact point with an appropriate activating cell.
0003365	name:Name:establishment of cell polarity involved in ameboidal cell migration	info:Definition:The specification and formation of anisotropic intracellular organization that contributes to the self-propelled directed movement of an ameboid cell.
0003424	name:Name:establishment of cell polarity involved in growth plate cartilage chondrocyte division	name:Synonym:growth plate cartilage chondrocyte polarization	info:Definition:The cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of anisotropic intracellular organization that results in the directional division of a growth plate cartilage chondrocyte.
0045200	name:Name:establishment of neuroblast polarity	name:Synonym:establishment of neuroblast cell polarity	info:Definition:The specification and formation of the apicobasal polarity of a neuroblast cell, a progenitor of the central nervous system.
0061162	name:Name:establishment of monopolar cell polarity	info:Definition:The specification and formation of monopolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns. Monopolar cell organization is directional organization along an axis.
0061171	name:Name:establishment of bipolar cell polarity	info:Definition:The specification and formation of bipolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns. Bipolar organization is the organization that is a mirror image along an axis from a plane.
0071964	name:Name:establishment of cell polarity regulating cell shape	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification or formation of a polarized intracellular organization or cell growth pattern that regulates the shape of a cell.
0090162	name:Name:establishment of epithelial cell polarity	info:Definition:The specification and formation of anisotropic intracellular organization of an epithelial cell.
0030011	name:Name:maintenance of cell polarity	info:Definition:The maintenance of established anisotropic intracellular organization or cell growth patterns.
0035090	name:Name:maintenance of apical/basal cell polarity	info:Definition:Retaining the established polarization of a cell along its apical/basal axis.
0045201	name:Name:maintenance of neuroblast polarity	name:Synonym:maintenance of neuroblast cell polarity	info:Definition:The maintenance of the apicobasal polarity of a neuroblast cell, a progenitor of the central nervous system.
0030952	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of cytoskeleton polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of polarized cytoskeletal structures.
0003371	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of cytoskeleton polarity involved in ameboidal cell migration	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of polarized cytoskeletal structures that contribute to the cell polarity of a migrating ameboid cell.
0030950	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of actin cytoskeleton polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of polarized actin-based cytoskeletal structures.
0042067	name:Name:establishment of ommatidial planar polarity	name:Synonym:establishment of ommatidial polarity	info:Definition:The specification of polarized ommatidia. Ommatidia occur in two chiral forms. The trapezoidal arrangement of photoreceptors in the dorsal part of the eye is the mirror image of that in the ventral part.
0045196	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of neuroblast polarity	name:Synonym:establishment and/or maintenance of neuroblast cell polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of the apicobasal polarity of a neuroblast cell, a progenitor of the central nervous system.
0061163	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum polarization	info:Definition:The endoplasmic reticulum organization process that results in the structure of the endoplasmic reticulum being oriented in the cell.
0061164	name:Name:transitional endoplasmic reticulum polarization at cell division site	info:Definition:The endoplasmic reticulum polarization process that results in the structure being polarized at the site of future cell division.
0061245	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of bipolar cell polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a bipolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns.
0035088	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of apical/basal cell polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance polarization of a cell's architecture along its apical/basal axis so that the apical and basal regions of the cell have different membrane, extracellular matrix and sub-membrane cellular components.
0061246	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of bipolar cell polarity regulating cell shape	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a bipolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns that regulates the shaping of a cell.
0061339	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of monopolar cell polarity	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of monopolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns. Monopolar cell organization is directional organization along an axis.
0061340	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of monopolar cell polarity regulating in cell shape	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a monopolar intracellular organization or cell growth patterns that regulating the shape of a cell.
0071963	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of cell polarity regulating cell shape	info:Definition:Any cellular process that results in the specification, formation or maintenance of a polarized intracellular organization or cell growth patterns that regulate the shape of a cell.
0007272	name:Name:ensheathment of neurons	name:Synonym:ionic insulation of neurons by glial cells	info:Definition:The process in which glial cells envelop neuronal cell bodies and/or axons to form an insulating layer. This can take the form of myelinating or non-myelinating ensheathment.
0008366	name:Name:axon ensheathment	name:Synonym:cellular axon ensheathment	name:Synonym:cellular nerve ensheathment	name:Synonym:nerve ensheathment	info:Definition:Any process in which the axon of a neuron is insulated, and that insulation maintained, thereby preventing dispersion of the electrical signal.
0032285	name:Name:non-myelinated axon ensheathment	name:Synonym:ensheathment of non-myelinated axons	info:Definition:The process in which a non-myelinating glial cell membrane closes around an axon.
0032291	name:Name:axon ensheathment in central nervous system	name:Synonym:ensheathment of axons in central nervous system	info:Definition:The process in which a glial cell membrane closes around an axon in the central nervous system. This can be a myelinating or a non-myelinating neuron-glial interaction.
0032292	name:Name:peripheral nervous system axon ensheathment	name:Synonym:ensheathment of axons in peripheral nervous system	info:Definition:The process in which a Schwann cell membrane closes around an axon in the peripheral nervous system. This can be a myelinating or a non-myelinating neuron-glial interaction.
0042552	name:Name:myelination	info:Definition:The process in which myelin sheaths are formed and maintained around neurons. Oligodendrocytes in the brain and spinal cord and Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system wrap axons with compact layers of their plasma membrane. Adjacent myelin segments are separated by a non-myelinated stretch of axon called a node of Ranvier.
0032295	name:Name:ensheathment of neuronal cell bodies	info:Definition:The process in which satellite glial cells isolate neuronal cell bodies.
0007569	name:Name:cell aging	name:Synonym:cell ageing	info:Definition:Progression of the cell from its inception to the end of its lifespan.
0001300	name:Name:chronological cell aging	name:Synonym:chronological cell ageing	info:Definition:The process associated with progression of the cell from its inception to the end of its lifespan that occurs when the cell is in a non-dividing, or quiescent, state.
0001302	name:Name:replicative cell aging	name:Synonym:replicative cell ageing	info:Definition:The process associated with progression of the cell from its inception to the end of its lifespan that occurs as the cell continues cycles of growth and division.
0090398	name:Name:cellular senescence	info:Definition:A cell aging process stimulated in response to cellular stress, whereby normal cells lose the ability to divide through irreversible cell cycle arrest.
0090399	name:Name:replicative senescence	info:Definition:A cellular senescence process associated with the dismantling of a cell as a response to telomere shortening and/or cellular aging.
0090400	name:Name:stress-induced premature senescence	name:Synonym:SIPS	info:Definition:A cellular senescence process associated with the dismantling of a cell as a response to environmental factors such as hydrogen peroxide or X-rays.
0090402	name:Name:oncogene-induced senescence	name:Synonym:OIS	info:Definition:A cellular senescence process associated with the dismantling of a cell as a response to oncogenic stress, such as the activation of the Ras oncogenic family.
0008037	name:Name:cell recognition	name:Synonym:recognition of surroundings by cell	info:Definition:The process in which a cell in a multicellular organism interprets its surroundings.
0006910	name:Name:phagocytosis, recognition	name:Synonym:recognition of phagocytosed substance by phagocytic cell	info:Definition:The initial step in phagocytosis involving adhesion to bacteria, immune complexes and other particulate matter, or an apoptotic cell and based on recognition of factors such as bacterial cell wall components, opsonins like complement and antibody or protein receptors and lipids like phosphatidyl serine, and leading to intracellular signaling in the phagocytosing cell.
0043654	name:Name:recognition of apoptotic cell	name:Synonym:detection of apoptotic cell	name:Synonym:detection of apoptotic cell corpse	name:Synonym:detection of cell corpse	name:Synonym:recognition of apoptotic cell corpse	name:Synonym:recognition of cell corpse	info:Definition:The process in which a cell interprets signals (in the form of specific proteins and lipids) on the surface of a dying cell which it will engulf and remove by phagocytosis.
0008038	name:Name:neuron recognition	name:Synonym:neuronal cell recognition	info:Definition:The process in which a neuronal cell in a multicellular organism interprets its surroundings.
0007413	name:Name:axonal fasciculation	name:Synonym:fasciculation of neuron	info:Definition:The collection of axons into a bundle of rods, known as a fascicle.
0007414	name:Name:axonal defasciculation	name:Synonym:defasciculation of neuron	info:Definition:Separation of axons away from a bundle of axons known as a fascicle.
0008039	name:Name:synaptic target recognition	name:Synonym:neuronal targeting	info:Definition:The process in which a neuronal cell in a multicellular organism interprets signals produced by potential target cells, with which it may form synapses.
0016198	name:Name:axon choice point recognition	info:Definition:The recognition of molecules at a choice point by an axon growth cone; at a choice point the growth cone determines the direction of its future growth.
0070593	name:Name:dendrite self-avoidance	name:Synonym:dendrite repulsion	info:Definition:The process in which dendrites recognize and avoid contact with sister dendrites from the same cell.
0009988	name:Name:cell-cell recognition	info:Definition:Cell recognition between cells, usually involving the formation of specialized cell junctions.
0001771	name:Name:immunological synapse formation	name:Synonym:formation of immunological synapse	info:Definition:The formation of an area of close contact between a lymphocyte (T-, B-, or natural killer cell) and a target cell through the clustering of particular signaling and adhesion molecules and their associated membrane rafts on both the lymphocyte and target cell, which facilitates activation of the lymphocyte, transfer of membrane from the target cell to the lymphocyte, and in some situations killing of the target cell through release of secretory granules and/or death-pathway ligand-receptor interaction.
0035036	name:Name:sperm-egg recognition	info:Definition:The initial contact step made between the sperm plasma membrane and outer layer of the egg during fertilization.
0080173	name:Name:Male-female gamete recognition during double fertilization	name:Synonym:gamete recognition	name:Synonym:male-female gamete recognition	info:Definition:The initial contact step made between the male gamete and the female gamete during double fertilization. An example can be found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0009989	name:Name:cell-matrix recognition	info:Definition:Cell recognition that involves the interaction of the cell with the extracellular matrix.
0009990	name:Name:contact guidance	info:Definition:Cell recognition involving the deposition of specific pathways in the extracellular matrix that guide migrating cells.
0048544	name:Name:recognition of pollen	name:Synonym:pollen recognition	name:Synonym:recognition or rejection of self pollen	name:Synonym:self incompatibility	info:Definition:The process, involving the sharing and interaction of the single locus incompatibility haplotypes, involved in the recognition or rejection of the self pollen by cells in the stigma. This process ensures out-breeding in certain plant species.
0060320	name:Name:rejection of self pollen	info:Definition:The process, involving the sharing and interaction of the single locus incompatibility haplotypes, involved in the rejection of the self pollen by cells in the stigma.
0060321	name:Name:acceptance of pollen	name:Synonym:acceptance of non-self pollen	name:Synonym:acceptance of self pollen	info:Definition:The process, involving the sharing and interaction of the single locus incompatibility haplotypes, involved in the acceptance of pollen by cells in the stigma.
0008219	name:Name:cell death	name:Synonym:necrosis	info:Definition:A biological process that results in permanent cessation of all vital functions of a cell.
0012501	name:Name:programmed cell death	name:Synonym:non-apoptotic programmed cell death	name:Synonym:nonapoptotic programmed cell death	info:Definition:Cell death resulting from activation of endogenous cellular processes.
0006915	name:Name:apoptosis	name:Synonym:apoptotic cell death	name:Synonym:apoptotic program	name:Synonym:apoptotic programmed cell death	name:Synonym:programmed cell death by apoptosis	name:Synonym:signaling (initiator) caspase activity	name:Synonym:type I programmed cell death	info:Definition:A form of programmed cell death that begins when a cell receives internal or external signals that trigger the activity of proteolytic caspases, proceeds through a series of characteristic stages typically including rounding-up of the cell, retraction of pseudopodes, reduction of cellular volume (pyknosis), chromatin condensation, nuclear fragmentation (karyorrhexis), and plasma membrane blebbing (but maintenance of its integrity until the final stages of the process), and ends with the death of the cell.
0010343	name:Name:singlet oxygen-mediated programmed cell death	name:Synonym:light-dependent programmed cell death	info:Definition:Programmed cell death induced by singlet oxygen. Programmed cell death is the cell death resulting from activation of endogenous cellular processes.
0010421	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide-mediated programmed cell death	info:Definition:Programmed cell death induced by hydrogen peroxide. Programmed cell death is the cell death resulting from activation of endogenous cellular processes.
0010623	name:Name:developmental programmed cell death	info:Definition:The activation of endogenous cellular processes that result in the death of a cell as part of its development.
0034050	name:Name:host programmed cell death induced by symbiont	info:Definition:Cell death in a host resulting from activation of host endogenous cellular processes after direct or indirect interaction with a symbiont (defined as the smaller of two, or more, organisms engaged in symbiosis, a close interaction encompassing mutualism through parasitism). An example of direct interaction is contact with penetrating hyphae of a fungus; an example of indirect interaction is encountering symbiont-secreted molecules.
0048102	name:Name:autophagic cell death	name:Synonym:autophagic death	name:Synonym:programmed cell death by autophagy	name:Synonym:type II programmed cell death	info:Definition:A form of programmed cell death that is accompanied by macroautophagy, which is characterized by the sequestration of cytoplasmic material within autophagosomes for bulk degradation by lysosomes. Autophagic cell death is characterized by lack of chromatin condensation, massive vacuolization of the cytoplasm, and accumulation of (double-membraned) autophagic vacuoles, with little or no uptake by phagocytic cells.
0070268	name:Name:cornification	info:Definition:A type of programmed cell death that occurs in the epidermis, morphologically and biochemically distinct from apoptosis. It leads to the formation of corneocytes, i.e. dead keratinocytes containing an amalgam of specific proteins (e.g., keratin, loricrin, SPR and involucrin) and lipids (e.g., fatty acids and ceramides), which are necessary for the function of the cornified skin layer (mechanical resistance, elasticity, water repellence and structural stability).
0070269	name:Name:pyroptosis	info:Definition:A type of programmed cell death that results from the apical activation of caspase-1.
0019835	name:Name:cytolysis	name:Synonym:autolysin activity	name:Synonym:bacteriocin activity	name:Synonym:bacteriolytic toxin activity	name:Synonym:holin	name:Synonym:lysin activity	name:Synonym:lysis	name:Synonym:necrosis	info:Definition:The rupture of cell membranes and the loss of cytoplasm.
0001896	name:Name:autolysis	info:Definition:The spontaneous death by lysis of bacteria in response to environmental conditions.
0070265	name:Name:necrotic cell death	name:Synonym:cellular necrosis	name:Synonym:necrosis	info:Definition:A cell death process that is morphologically characterized by a gain in cell volume (oncosis), swelling of organelles, plasma membrane rupture and subsequent loss of intracellular contents.
0070266	name:Name:necroptosis	name:Synonym:programmed necrotic cell death	info:Definition:A necrotic cell death process that results from the activation of endogenous cellular processes, such as signaling involving death domain receptors and Toll-like receptors.
0070997	name:Name:neuron death	name:Synonym:neuron cell death	name:Synonym:neuronal cell death	info:Definition:The process of cell death in a neuron.
0051402	name:Name:neuron apoptosis	name:Synonym:apoptosis of neuronal cells	name:Synonym:apoptosis of neurons	name:Synonym:neuron programmed cell death by apoptosis	name:Synonym:neuronal cell apoptosis	name:Synonym:neuronal cell programmed cell death by apoptosis	name:Synonym:programmed cell death of neuronal cells by apoptosis	name:Synonym:programmed cell death of neurons by apoptosis	name:Synonym:programmed cell death, neuronal cells	name:Synonym:programmed cell death, neurons	info:Definition:The process of apoptosis in neurons, the basic cellular unit of nervous tissue. Each neuron consists of a body, an axon, and dendrites. Their purpose is to receive, conduct, and transmit impulses in the nervous system.
0010118	name:Name:stomatal movement	info:Definition:The process of opening or closing of stomata, which is directly related to the stomatal conductance (measuring rate of passage of either water vapor or carbon dioxide (CO2) through stomata).
0090332	name:Name:stomatal closure	info:Definition:The process of closing of stomata, pores in the epidermis of leaves and stems bordered by two guard cells and serving in gas exchange.
0016037	name:Name:light absorption	name:Synonym:absorption of light	info:Definition:The reception of a photon by a cell.
0016038	name:Name:absorption of visible light	info:Definition:The reception of a (visible light) photon by a cell, visible light being defined as having a wavelength within the range 380-780 nm.
0016039	name:Name:absorption of UV light	info:Definition:The reception of a (UV light) photon by a cell, UV light being defined as having a wavelength within the range 13.6-400 nm.
0016044	name:Name:cellular membrane organization	name:Synonym:membrane organisation	name:Synonym:membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a membrane. A membrane is a double layer of lipid molecules that encloses all cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins.
0001941	name:Name:postsynaptic membrane organization	name:Synonym:postsynaptic membrane organisation	info:Definition:The maintenance of membrane composition in a postsynaptic membrane, the specialized area of membrane facing the presynaptic membrane on the tip of the nerve ending and separated from it by a minute cleft (the synaptic cleft).
0071340	name:Name:skeletal muscle nicotinic acetylcholine receptor clustering	name:Synonym:skeletal muscle AChR clustering	info:Definition:The accumulation of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) in a narrow, central region of muscle fibers, in apposition to nerve terminals.
0097104	name:Name:postsynaptic membrane assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a postsynaptic membrane, a specialized area of membrane facing the presynaptic membrane on the tip of the nerve ending and separated from it by a minute cleft (the synaptic cleft).
0006900	name:Name:membrane budding	name:Synonym:membrane evagination	name:Synonym:nonselective vesicle assembly	name:Synonym:vesicle biosynthesis	name:Synonym:vesicle budding	name:Synonym:vesicle formation	info:Definition:The evagination of a membrane, resulting in formation of a vesicle.
0035964	name:Name:COPI-coated vesicle budding	name:Synonym:COPI vesicle budding 	info:Definition:The evagination of a Golgi membrane, resulting in formation of a COPI vesicle.
0048194	name:Name:Golgi vesicle budding	name:Synonym:dictyosome vesicle budding	name:Synonym:Golgi-derived vesicle budding	info:Definition:The evagination of the Golgi membrane, resulting in formation of a vesicle.
0070142	name:Name:synaptic vesicle budding	info:Definition:Evagination of a membrane to form a synaptic vesicle.
0070676	name:Name:intralumenal vesicle formation	name:Synonym:endosome membrane budding	info:Definition:The evagination of the endosome membrane, resulting in the formation of a vesicle.
0090114	name:Name:COPII-coated vesicle budding	name:Synonym:COPII vesicle budding	name:Synonym:ER exit	name:Synonym:ER vesicle budding	info:Definition:The evagination of an endoplasmic reticulum membrane, resulting in formation of a COPII vesicle.
0006944	name:Name:cellular membrane fusion	info:Definition:The cellular process that joins two lipid bilayers to form a single membrane.
0002078	name:Name:membrane fusion involved in acrosome reaction	name:Synonym:membrane fusion involved in the acrosomal reaction	info:Definition:The fusion of the plasma membrane of the sperm with the outer acrosomal membrane.
0006906	name:Name:vesicle fusion	info:Definition:Fusion of the membrane of a transport vesicle with its target membrane.
0008053	name:Name:mitochondrial fusion	info:Definition:Merging of two or more mitochondria within a cell to form a single compartment.
0016189	name:Name:synaptic vesicle to endosome fusion	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle fusion	info:Definition:Fusion of a synaptic vesicle with the membrane of an endosome.
0042144	name:Name:vacuole fusion, non-autophagic	name:Synonym:homotypic vacuole fusion	name:Synonym:homotypic vacuole fusion (non-autophagic)	name:Synonym:homotypic vacuole fusion, non-autophagic	name:Synonym:vacuole fusion (non-autophagic)	info:Definition:The fusion of two vacuole membranes to form a single vacuole.
0045026	name:Name:plasma membrane fusion	name:Synonym:cell fusion	name:Synonym:cell-cell fusion	info:Definition:The joining of two or more lipid bilayer membranes that surround a cell.
0090174	name:Name:organelle membrane fusion	info:Definition:The joining of two lipid bilayers to form a single organelle membrane.
0006998	name:Name:nuclear envelope organization	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope organisation	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the nuclear envelope.
0018985	name:Name:pronuclear envelope synthesis	info:Definition:Synthesis and ordering of the envelope of pronuclei.
0031468	name:Name:nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The reformation of the nuclear envelope following its breakdown in the context of a normal process.
0051081	name:Name:nuclear envelope disassembly	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope breakdown	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope catabolism	name:Synonym:nuclear envelope degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the nuclear envelope in the context of a normal process.
0007006	name:Name:mitochondrial membrane organization	name:Synonym:mitochondrial membrane organisation	name:Synonym:mitochondrial membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a mitochondrial membrane, either of the lipid bilayer surrounding a mitochondrion.
0007007	name:Name:inner mitochondrial membrane organization	name:Synonym:inner mitochondrial membrane organisation	name:Synonym:inner mitochondrial membrane organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:mitochondrial inner membrane organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the mitochondrial inner membrane.
0007008	name:Name:outer mitochondrial membrane organization	name:Synonym:outer mitochondrial membrane organisation	name:Synonym:outer mitochondrial membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the mitochondrial outer membrane.
0046902	name:Name:regulation of mitochondrial membrane permeability	name:Synonym:regulation of transport across mitochondrial membrane	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the passage or uptake of molecules by the mitochondrial membrane.
0051204	name:Name:protein insertion into mitochondrial membrane	name:Synonym:integral mitochondrial membrane protein localization	name:Synonym:integral mitochondrial membrane protein positioning	name:Synonym:localization of protein in mitochondrial membrane	name:Synonym:positioning of protein in mitochondrial membrane	name:Synonym:protein insertion into mitochondrion membrane	name:Synonym:protein-mitochondrial membrane insertion	name:Synonym:protein-mitochondrion membrane insertion	info:Definition:The process that results in the incorporation of a protein into a mitochondrial membrane.
0090151	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in mitochondrial membrane	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation in mitochondrial membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the mitochondrial membrane.
0007009	name:Name:plasma membrane organization	name:Synonym:plasma membrane organisation	name:Synonym:plasma membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the plasma membrane.
0001778	name:Name:plasma membrane repair	info:Definition:The resealing of a cell plasma membrane after cellular wounding due to, for instance, mechanical stress.
0017121	name:Name:phospholipid scrambling	name:Synonym:PL scrambling	info:Definition:The movement of a population of phospholipid molecules from one leaflet of the plasma membrane bilayer to the opposite leaflet, resulting in loss of lipid asymmetry and surface exposure of phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE).
0043217	name:Name:myelin maintenance	info:Definition:The process of preserving the structure and function of mature myelin. This includes maintaining the compact structure of myelin necessary for its electrical insulating characteristics as well as the structure of non-compact regions such as Schmidt-Lantermann clefts and paranodal loops. This does not include processes responsible for maintaining the nodes of Ranvier, which are not part of the myelin sheath.
0060098	name:Name:membrane reorganization involved in phagocytosis, engulfment	info:Definition:The assembly and arrangement of the plasma membrane that is involved in the internalization of bacteria, immune complexes and other particulate matter or of an apoptotic cell by phagocytosis.
0070872	name:Name:plasma membrane organization involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:A process of plasma membrane organization that contributes to conjugation with cellular fusion.
0072659	name:Name:protein localization in plasma membrane	name:Synonym:protein localisation in plasma membrane	info:Definition:A process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location in the plasma membrane.
0097036	name:Name:regulation of plasma membrane sterol distribution	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the proportions or spatial arrangement of sterols in the plasma membrane.
0007107	name:Name:membrane addition at site of cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, membrane recruitment/generation	info:Definition:Any process involved in the net addition of membrane at the site of cytokinesis; includes vesicle recruitment and fusion, local lipid synthesis and insertion.
0009668	name:Name:plastid membrane organization	name:Synonym:plastid membrane organisation	name:Synonym:plastid membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of either of the lipid bilayers surrounding a plastid.
0009666	name:Name:plastid outer membrane organization	name:Synonym:plastid outer membrane organisation	name:Synonym:plastid outer membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the outer membrane of a plastid.
0009667	name:Name:plastid inner membrane organization	name:Synonym:plastid inner membrane organisation	name:Synonym:plastid inner membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the inner membrane of a plastid.
0010027	name:Name:thylakoid membrane organization	name:Synonym:thylakoid membrane organisation	name:Synonym:thylakoid membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the thylakoid membrane.
0010256	name:Name:endomembrane system organization	name:Synonym:endomembrane organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the endomembrane system.
0010324	name:Name:membrane invagination	info:Definition:The infolding of a membrane, resulting in formation of a vesicle.
0006897	name:Name:endocytosis	name:Synonym:nonselective vesicle endocytosis	name:Synonym:plasma membrane invagination	name:Synonym:vesicle endocytosis	info:Definition:A vesicle-mediated transport process in which cells take up external materials or membrane constituents by the invagination of a small region of the plasma membrane to form a new membrane-bounded vesicle.
0006911	name:Name:phagocytosis, engulfment	name:Synonym:phagosome biosynthesis	name:Synonym:phagosome formation	info:Definition:The internalization of bacteria, immune complexes and other particulate matter or of an apoptotic cell by phagocytosis, including the membrane and cytoskeletal processes required, which involves one of three mechanisms: zippering of pseudopods around a target via repeated receptor-ligand interactions, sinking of the target directly into plasma membrane of the phagocytosing cell, or induced uptake via an enhanced membrane ruffling of the phagocytosing cell similar to macropinocytosis.
0016237	name:Name:microautophagy	info:Definition:The transfer of cytosolic components into the lysosomal compartment by direct invagination of the lysosomal membrane without prior sequestration into an autophagosome. The engulfing membranes fuse, resulting in the lysosomal delivery of the cargo wrapped in a single membrane derived from the invaginated lysosomal membrane. In S. cerevisiae, the vacuole is the lysosomal compartment.
0030397	name:Name:membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:membrane breakdown	name:Synonym:membrane catabolism	name:Synonym:membrane degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of any cell membrane in the context of a normal process such as autophagy.
0010547	name:Name:thylakoid membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:thylakoid membrane degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the thylakoid membrane in the context of a normal process.
0030398	name:Name:peroxisomal membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:peroxisomal membrane breakdown	name:Synonym:peroxisomal membrane catabolism	name:Synonym:peroxisomal membrane degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the membranes of cargo-carrying vesicles formed during peroxisome degradation.
0030399	name:Name:autophagic membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:autophagic membrane breakdown	name:Synonym:autophagic membrane catabolism	name:Synonym:autophagic membrane degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the membranes of autophagic vacuoles.
0034496	name:Name:multivesicular body membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:MVB membrane disassembly	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the membranes of multivesicular bodies.
0035045	name:Name:sperm plasma membrane disassembly	name:Synonym:sperm plasma membrane breakdown	name:Synonym:sperm plasma membrane catabolism	name:Synonym:sperm plasma membrane degradation	info:Definition:The gradual disintegration of the sperm plasma membrane following insemination. This process is seen in Drosophila after entry of the entire sperm, surrounded by its plasma membrane, into the egg.
0031579	name:Name:membrane raft organization	name:Synonym:lipid raft organization	name:Synonym:membrane raft organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of membrane rafts, small (10-200 nm), heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched membrane domains that compartmentalize cellular processes.
0001765	name:Name:membrane raft assembly	name:Synonym:lipid raft assembly	name:Synonym:lipid raft formation	name:Synonym:membrane raft formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a membrane raft, a small (10-200 nm), heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched membrane domains that compartmentalizes cellular processes.
0031580	name:Name:membrane raft distribution	name:Synonym:lipid raft distribution	info:Definition:The process that establishes the spatial arrangement of membrane rafts within a cellular membrane.
0032594	name:Name:protein transport within lipid bilayer	name:Synonym:protein translocation within membrane	name:Synonym:receptor translocation within membrane	name:Synonym:receptor transport within lipid bilayer	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein from one location to another within a lipid bilayer.
0032595	name:Name:B cell receptor transport within lipid bilayer	name:Synonym:B cell receptor translocation within membrane	name:Synonym:BCR translocation within membrane	name:Synonym:BCR transport within lipid bilayer	info:Definition:The directed movement of a B cell receptor within a lipid bilayer.
0032596	name:Name:protein transport into membrane raft	name:Synonym:protein translocation into membrane raft	name:Synonym:protein transport into lipid raft	name:Synonym:receptor translocation into membrane raft	name:Synonym:receptor transport into membrane raft	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein into a membrane raft.
0032599	name:Name:protein transport out of membrane raft	name:Synonym:protein translocation out of membrane raft	name:Synonym:protein transport out of lipid raft	name:Synonym:receptor translocation out of membrane raft	name:Synonym:receptor transport out of membrane raft	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein out of a membrane raft.
0033606	name:Name:chemokine receptor transport within lipid bilayer	name:Synonym:chemokine receptor translocation within membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of a chemokine receptor within a lipid bilayer.
0033292	name:Name:T-tubule organization	name:Synonym:T-tubule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level that results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the T-tubule. A T-tubule is an invagination of the plasma membrane of a muscle cell that extends inward from the cell surface around each myofibril.
0045161	name:Name:neuronal ion channel clustering	info:Definition:The process in which voltage-gated ion channels become localized to distinct subcellular domains in the neuron. Specific targeting, clustering, and maintenance of these channels in their respective domains are essential to achieve high conduction velocities of action potential propagation.
0045162	name:Name:clustering of voltage-gated sodium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage gated sodium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage-dependent sodium channels	name:Synonym:Nav channel clustering	name:Synonym:voltage-gated sodium channel clustering	info:Definition:The process in which voltage-gated sodium channels become localized together in high densities. In animals, nodes of Ranvier differ dramatically from internodal axonal regions in very high densities of voltage-dependent sodium (Nav) channels responsible for the rapid, inward ionic currents that produce membrane depolarization.
0045163	name:Name:clustering of voltage-gated potassium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage gated potassium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage-dependent potassium channels	name:Synonym:Kv channel clustering	name:Synonym:voltage-gated potassium channel clustering	info:Definition:The process in which voltage-gated potassium channels become localized together in high densities. In animals, voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channels are clustered beneath the myelin sheath in regions immediately adjacent to paranodes, called juxtaparanodes, and along the inner mesaxon within the internode.
0070073	name:Name:clustering of voltage-gated calcium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage gated calcium channels	name:Synonym:clustering of voltage-dependent calcium channels	name:Synonym:voltage-gated calcium channel clustering	info:Definition:The process in which voltage-gated calcium channels become localized together in high densities.
0048198	name:Name:Golgi vesicle bud deformation and release	name:Synonym:dictyosome vesicle bud deformation	name:Synonym:Golgi-derived vesicle bud deformation and release	info:Definition:The process in which cytosolic coat proteins fit together in a basketlike convex framework to form a coated deformed region on the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane. The deformed region forms into a complete vesicle and is released.
0048499	name:Name:synaptic vesicle membrane organization	name:Synonym:SLMV biogenesis	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle membrane organisation	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the membrane surrounding a synaptic vesicle.
0070583	name:Name:spore membrane bending pathway	name:Synonym:ascospore-type prospore membrane bending	name:Synonym:forespore membrane bending	name:Synonym:FSM bending	info:Definition:The process in which a bending force is generated in the prospore membrane to form the characteristic curved shape of the prospore.
0071709	name:Name:membrane assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a membrane.
0032120	name:Name:ascospore-type prospore membrane assembly	name:Synonym:forespore membrane biosynthesis	name:Synonym:forespore membrane formation	name:Synonym:FSM assembly	name:Synonym:FSM biosynthesis	name:Synonym:FSM formation	info:Definition:The process in which the nascent membrane forms at the meiotic outer plaque and grows until closure occurs and forespores, or prospores, are formed.
0043165	name:Name:Gram-negative-bacterium-type cell outer membrane assembly	name:Synonym:cell outer membrane biogenesis	info:Definition:The assembly of an outer membrane of the type formed in Gram-negative bacteria. This membrane is enriched in polysaccharide and protein, and the outer leaflet of the membrane contains specific lipopolysaccharide structures.
0071763	name:Name:nuclear membrane organization	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane organisation	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the nuclear inner or outer membrane.
0030264	name:Name:nuclear fragmentation involved in apoptotic nuclear change	name:Synonym:apoptotic nuclear fragmentation	name:Synonym:nuclear fragmentation during apoptosis	name:Synonym:nucleus fragmentation	info:Definition:The breakdown of the nucleus into small membrane-bounded compartments, or blebs, each of which contain compacted DNA.
0071764	name:Name:nuclear outer membrane organization	name:Synonym:nuclear outer membrane organisation	name:Synonym:nuclear outer membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the nuclear outer membrane.
0071765	name:Name:nuclear inner membrane organization	name:Synonym:nuclear inner membrane organisation	name:Synonym:nuclear inner membrane organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the nuclear inner membrane.
0072657	name:Name:protein localization in membrane	name:Synonym:protein localisation in membrane	info:Definition:A process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location in a membrane.
0043113	name:Name:receptor clustering	info:Definition:The receptor metabolic process that results in grouping of a set of receptors at a cellular location, often to amplify the sensitivity of a signaling response.
0097115	name:Name:neurexin clustering	name:Synonym:Nrxn clustering	info:Definition:The clustering process in which neurexins are localized to distinct domains in the cell membrane. Neurexins are synaptic cell surface proteins which act as cell recognition molecules at nerve terminals.
0097116	name:Name:gephyrin clustering	name:Synonym:Geph clustering	info:Definition:The clustering process in which gephyrin molecules are localized to distinct domains in the cell membrane. Gephyrin is a component of the postsynaptic protein network of inhibitory synapses.
0097117	name:Name:guanylate kinase-associated protein clustering	name:Synonym:GKAP clustering	info:Definition:The clustering process in which guanylate kinase-associated proteins (GKAPs) are localized to distinct domains in the cell membrane. GKAP facilitates assembly of the post synaptic density of neurons.
0097118	name:Name:neuroligin clustering	name:Synonym:Nlgn clustering	info:Definition:The clustering process in which neuroligins are localized to distinct domains in the cell membrane. Neuroligins are neuronal cell surface proteins on the postsynaptic membrane that mediate synapse formation between neurons.
0097119	name:Name:postsynaptic density protein 95 clustering	name:Synonym:Dlg4 clustering	name:Synonym:post-synaptic density protein 95 clustering	name:Synonym:PSD-95 clustering	info:Definition:The clustering process in which postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) molecules are localized to distinct domains in the cell membrane. PSD-95 is mostly located in the post synaptic density of neurons, and is involved in anchoring synaptic proteins.
0090148	name:Name:membrane fission	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the separation of a single continuous membrane into two membranes.
0090149	name:Name:membrane fission involved in mitochondrial fission	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the separation of a single continuous mitochondrial membrane into two membranes and contributes to mitochondrial fission.
0090158	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum membrane organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
0097035	name:Name:regulation of membrane lipid distribution	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the proportions or spatial arrangement of lipids in a cellular membrane.
0034204	name:Name:lipid translocation	info:Definition:The translocation, or flipping, of lipid molecules from one monolayer of a membrane bilayer to the opposite monolayer.
0097090	name:Name:presynaptic membrane organization	name:Synonym:presynaptic membrane organisation	info:Definition:The maintenance of membrane composition in a presynaptic membrane, a specialized area of membrane of the axon terminal that faces the plasma membrane of the neuron or muscle fiber with which the axon terminal establishes a synaptic junction.
0097091	name:Name:synaptic vesicle clustering	info:Definition:The process that results in grouping synaptic vesicles, prior to release, at a specialized patch of the presynaptic membrane referred to as the active zone.
0097105	name:Name:presynaptic membrane assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a presynaptic membrane, a specialized area of membrane of the axon terminal that faces the plasma membrane of the neuron or muscle fiber with which the axon terminal establishes a synaptic junction.
0016049	name:Name:cell growth	name:Synonym:cell expansion	name:Synonym:cellular growth	name:Synonym:growth of cell	name:Synonym:metabolic process resulting in cell growth	name:Synonym:metabolism resulting in cell growth	name:Synonym:non-developmental cell growth	name:Synonym:non-developmental growth of a unicellular organism	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size over time by accretion and biosynthetic production of matter similar to that already present.
0007124	name:Name:pseudohyphal growth	info:Definition:A pattern of cell growth that occurs in conditions of nitrogen limitation and abundant fermentable carbon source. Cells become elongated, switch to a unipolar budding pattern, remain physically attached to each other, and invade the growth substrate.
0009825	name:Name:multidimensional cell growth	name:Synonym:cell growth in three dimensions	name:Synonym:cell growth in two dimensions	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size in two or three [spatial] dimensions or along two or three axes.
0009826	name:Name:unidimensional cell growth	name:Synonym:cell elongation	name:Synonym:cell growth along one axis	name:Synonym:cell growth in one dimension	name:Synonym:cell morphogenesis by unidimensional growth	name:Synonym:polar cell growth	name:Synonym:polarized cell growth	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size in one [spatial] dimension or along one axis, resulting in the morphogenesis of the cell.
0007394	name:Name:dorsal closure, elongation of leading edge cells	info:Definition:The change in shape of cells at the dorsal-most (leading) edge of the epidermis from being polygonal to being elongated in the dorsal/ventral axis.
0009932	name:Name:cell tip growth	info:Definition:Growth that occurs specifically at the tip of a cell.
0042814	name:Name:monopolar cell growth	name:Synonym:monopolar cell elongation	name:Synonym:monopolar growth	name:Synonym:polar cell elongation	info:Definition:Polarized growth from one end of a cell.
0042815	name:Name:bipolar cell growth	name:Synonym:bipolar cell elongation	name:Synonym:bipolar growth	name:Synonym:polar cell elongation	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size along one axis through simultaneous polarized growth from opposite ends of a cell, resulting in morphogenesis of the cell.
0080159	name:Name:zygote elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the zygote irreversibly increases in size in one dimension after fertilization. An example of such a process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0090254	name:Name:cell elongation involved in imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a cell elongates and contributes to imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis.
0090378	name:Name:seed trichome elongation	info:Definition:The process in which a seed trichome irreversibly increases in size in one [spatial] dimension or along one axis, resulting in the morphogenesis of the cell.
0048588	name:Name:developmental cell growth	name:Synonym:developmental growth of a unicellular organism	info:Definition:The growth of a cell, where growth contributes to the progression of the cell over time from one condition to another.
0001555	name:Name:oocyte growth	info:Definition:The developmental growth process in which an oocyte irreversibly increases in size over time by accretion and biosynthetic production of matter similar to that already present.
0003247	name:Name:post-embryonic cardiac muscle cell growth involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:The growth of a cardiac muscle cell during the postembryonic period that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0003415	name:Name:chondrocyte hypertrophy	info:Definition:The growth of a chondrocyte, where growth contributes to the progression of the chondrocyte over time.
0007285	name:Name:primary spermatocyte growth	info:Definition:The phase of growth and gene expression that male germ cells undergo as they enter the spermatocyte stage. The cells grow in volume and transcribe most of the gene products needed for the morphological events that follow meiosis.
0009860	name:Name:pollen tube growth	info:Definition:Growth of pollen via tip extension of the intine wall.
0042065	name:Name:glial cell growth	info:Definition:Growth of glial cells, non-neuronal cells that provide support and nutrition, maintain homeostasis, form myelin, and participate in signal transmission in the nervous system.
0048668	name:Name:collateral sprouting	info:Definition:The process in which outgrowths develop from the shafts of existing axons.
0048675	name:Name:axon extension	info:Definition:Long distance growth of a single process.
0048682	name:Name:sprouting of injured axon	info:Definition:The process involved in sprouting of an injured axon.
0048767	name:Name:root hair elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the root hair grows longer.
0061049	name:Name:cell growth involved in cardiac muscle cell development	name:Synonym:cardiac muscle cell hypertrophy	name:Synonym:cardiomyocyte growth	name:Synonym:heart muscle cell growth	info:Definition:The growth of a cardiac muscle cell, where growth contributes to the progression of the cell over time from its initial formation to its mature state.
0061335	name:Name:cell growth involved in Malpighian tubule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The growth of an epithelial cell dependent on cycles of endoreplication, where growth contributes to the shaping of the Malpighian tubule.
0051210	name:Name:isotropic cell growth	name:Synonym:uniform cell growth	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size uniformly in all directions. In general, a rounded cell morphology reflects isotropic cell growth.
0051211	name:Name:anisotropic cell growth	name:Synonym:non-isotropic cell growth	info:Definition:The process in which a cell irreversibly increases in size in one or more axes, where the growth rate varies according to the direction of growth. Growth may be limited to a particular axis, axes, or to particular locations on the surface of the cell.
0016192	name:Name:vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:nonselective vesicle transport	name:Synonym:protein sorting along secretory pathway	name:Synonym:vesicle trafficking	name:Synonym:vesicle transport	name:Synonym:vesicular transport	info:Definition:A cellular transport process in which transported substances are moved in membrane-bounded vesicles; transported substances are enclosed in the vesicle lumen or located in the vesicle membrane. The process begins with a step that directs a substance to the forming vesicle, and includes vesicle budding and coating. Vesicles are then targeted to, and fuse with, an acceptor membrane.
0006887	name:Name:exocytosis	name:Synonym:nonselective vesicle exocytosis	name:Synonym:vesicle exocytosis	info:Definition:A process of secretion by a cell that results in the release of intracellular molecules (e.g. hormones, matrix proteins) contained within a membrane-bounded vesicle by fusion of the vesicle with the plasma membrane of a cell. This is the process in which most molecules are secreted from eukaryotic cells.
0002576	name:Name:platelet degranulation	name:Synonym:platelet exocytosis	info:Definition:The regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as histamine and serotonin by a platelet.
0016079	name:Name:synaptic vesicle exocytosis	info:Definition:Fusion of intracellular membrane-bounded vesicles with the pre-synaptic membrane of the neuronal cell resulting in release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft.
0017156	name:Name:calcium ion-dependent exocytosis	info:Definition:The release of intracellular molecules (e.g. hormones, matrix proteins) contained within a membrane-bounded vesicle by fusion of the vesicle with the plasma membrane of a cell, requiring the presence of calcium ions.
0045054	name:Name:constitutive secretory pathway	info:Definition:A process of exocytosis found in all eukaryotic cells, in which transport vesicles destined for the plasma membrane leave the trans-Golgi network in a steady stream. Upon exocytosis, the membrane proteins and lipids in these vesicles provide new components for the plasma membrane, and the soluble proteins inside the vesicles are released into the extracellular space.
0045055	name:Name:regulated secretory pathway	info:Definition:A process of exocytosis in which soluble proteins and other substances are initially stored in secretory vesicles for later release. It is found mainly in cells that are specialized for secreting products such as hormones, neurotransmitters, or digestive enzymes rapidly on demand.
0016197	name:Name:endosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances into, out of or mediated by an endosome, a membrane-bounded organelle that carries materials newly ingested by endocytosis. It passes many of the materials to lysosomes for degradation.
0006895	name:Name:Golgi to endosome transport	name:Synonym:Golgi to endosome vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:TGN to endosome transport	name:Synonym:trans-Golgi to endosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the Golgi to early sorting endosomes. Clathrin vesicles transport substances from the trans-Golgi to endosomes.
0008333	name:Name:endosome to lysosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from endosomes to lysosomes.
0016182	name:Name:synaptic vesicle budding from endosome	name:Synonym:endosome to synaptic vesicle budding	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle budding involved in synaptic vesicle exocytosis	info:Definition:Budding of synaptic vesicles during the formation of constitutive recycling vesicles from early endosomes.
0032456	name:Name:endocytic recycling	name:Synonym:retrograde transport of endocytic vesicles	info:Definition:The directed movement of membrane-bounded vesicles from recycling endosomes back to the plasma membrane where they are recycled for further rounds of transport.
0032509	name:Name:endosome transport via multivesicular body sorting pathway	name:Synonym:endosome transport via MVB sorting pathway	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from endosomes to lysosomes or vacuoles by a pathway in which molecules are sorted into multivesicular bodies, which then fuse with the target compartment.
0035646	name:Name:endosome to melanosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from endosomes to the melanosome, a specialised lysosome-related organelle.
0042147	name:Name:retrograde transport, endosome to Golgi	name:Synonym:retrograde (endosome to Golgi) transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of membrane-bounded vesicles from endosomes back to the trans-Golgi network where they are recycled for further rounds of transport.
0043485	name:Name:endosome to pigment granule transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from endosomes to pigment granules.
0045022	name:Name:early endosome to late endosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances, in membrane-bounded vesicles, from the early sorting endosomes to the late sorting endosomes; transport occurs along microtubules and can be experimentally blocked with microtubule-depolymerizing drugs.
0045324	name:Name:late endosome to vacuole transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from late endosomes to the vacuole. In yeast, after transport to the prevacuolar compartment, endocytic content is delivered to the late endosome and on to the vacuole. This pathway is analogous to endosome to lysosome transport.
0035526	name:Name:retrograde transport, plasma membrane to Golgi	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the plasma membrane back to the trans-Golgi network, mediated by vesicles.
0045056	name:Name:transcytosis	info:Definition:The directed movement of endocytosed material through the cell and its exocytosis from the plasma membrane at the opposite side.
0002412	name:Name:antigen transcytosis by M cells in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	name:Synonym:antigen transcytosis by M cells in MALT	name:Synonym:antigen transport by M cells in MALT	name:Synonym:antigen transport by M cells in mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue	info:Definition:The process of antigen transcytosis carried out by M cells in the mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Transcytosis is the process of the directed movement of endocytosed material through the cell and its exocytosis from the plasma membrane at the opposite side. M cells are specialized epithelia cells with a microfold structure that are adept at moving antigens from the gut lumen to antigen presenting cells in the MALT.
0002414	name:Name:immunoglobulin transcytosis in epithelial cells	info:Definition:The process of transporting immunoglobulin, via transcytosis, from one side of an epithelial cell to the other.
0048193	name:Name:Golgi vesicle transport	name:Synonym:Golgi-derived vesicle transport 	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances into, out of or within the Golgi apparatus, mediated by vesicles.
0006888	name:Name:ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:ER to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:rough endoplasmic reticulum to cis-Golgi transport	name:Synonym:rough endoplasmic reticulum to cis-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:rough ER to cis-Golgi transport	name:Synonym:rough ER to cis-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi, mediated by COP II vesicles. Small COP II coated vesicles form from the ER and then fuse directly with the cis-Golgi. Larger structures are transported along microtubules to the cis-Golgi.
0006890	name:Name:retrograde vesicle-mediated transport, Golgi to ER	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough endoplasmic reticulum transport	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough endoplasmic reticulum vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough ER transport	name:Synonym:cis-Golgi to rough ER vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:retrograde (Golgi to ER) transport	name:Synonym:retrograde transport, Golgi to endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:retrograde transport, Golgi to ER	name:Synonym:retrograde vesicle-mediated transport, Golgi to endoplasmic reticulum	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the Golgi back to the endoplasmic reticulum, mediated by vesicles bearing specific protein coats such as COPI or COG.
0006891	name:Name:intra-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:intra-Golgi transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances within the Golgi, mediated by small transport vesicles. These either fuse with the cis-Golgi or with each other to form the membrane stacks known as the cis-Golgi reticulum (network).
0006892	name:Name:post-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:post-Golgi transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the Golgi to other parts of the cell, including organelles and the plasma membrane, mediated by small transport vesicles.
0034498	name:Name:early endosome to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:PGE to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:post-Golgi endosome to Golgi transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from early endosomes to the Golgi.
0034499	name:Name:late endosome to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:prevacuolar endosome to Golgi transport	name:Synonym:PVE to Golgi transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from late endosomes to the Golgi.
0048219	name:Name:inter-Golgi cisterna vesicle-mediated transport	name:Synonym:inter-Golgi cisterna transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from one Golgi cisterna to another, mediated by small transport vesicles.
0071955	name:Name:recycling endosome to Golgi transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from recycling endosomes to the Golgi.
0048489	name:Name:synaptic vesicle transport	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle fission	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle fusion	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances in synaptic membrane-bounded vesicles within the neuron along the cytoskeleton either toward or away from the neuronal cell body.
0015842	name:Name:synaptic vesicle amine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of amines into, out of or within synaptic vesicles.
0048488	name:Name:synaptic vesicle endocytosis	name:Synonym:synaptic vesicle retrieval	info:Definition:An endocytosis process that results in the invagination of the axonal plasma membrane to create a membrane-bounded vesicle. This process takes up excess membrane that would otherwise accumulate at the presynaptic terminal due to fusion of vesicle membranes during neurotransmitter release. The vesicles created may subsequently be used for neurotransmitter storage and release.
0048490	name:Name:anterograde synaptic vesicle transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances in synaptic membrane-bounded vesicles within the neuron, along the cytoskeleton, away from the neuronal cell body.
0048491	name:Name:retrograde synaptic vesicle transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances in synaptic membrane-bounded vesicles within the neuron, along the cytoskeleton, toward the neuronal cell body.
0060858	name:Name:vesicle-mediated transport involved in floral organ abscission	name:Synonym:membrane trafficking involved in floral organ shedding	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances within a cell by a cellular process that begins with the formation of membrane-bounded vesicles in which the transported substances are enclosed or located in the vesicle membrane which are then targeted to, and fuse with, an acceptor membrane contributing to the shedding of a floral organ.
0070177	name:Name:contractile vacuole discharge	info:Definition:The regulated release of water from a contractile vacuole to the outside of a cell by fusion of the contractile vacuole membrane with the plasma membrane.
0071985	name:Name:multivesicular body sorting pathway	info:Definition:A vesicle-mediated transport process in which transmembrane proteins are ubiquitylated to facilitate their entry into luminal vesicles of multivesicular bodies (MVBs); upon subsequent fusion of MVBs with lysosomes or vacuoles, the cargo proteins are degraded.
0016458	name:Name:gene silencing	name:Synonym:long-term maintenance of gene inactivation	info:Definition:Any transcriptional or post-transcriptional process carried out at the cellular level that results in long-term gene inactivation.
0006342	name:Name:chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:chromatin-mediated maintenance of transcriptional inactivation	name:Synonym:chromatin-mediated silencing	name:Synonym:heterochromatic silencing	name:Synonym:TGS	name:Synonym:transcriptional gene silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription by altering the structure of chromatin, e.g. by conversion of large regions of DNA into an inaccessible state often called heterochromatin.
0000183	name:Name:chromatin silencing at rDNA	name:Synonym:chromatin silencing at ribosomal DNA	name:Synonym:heterochromatic silencing at rDNA	name:Synonym:rDNA chromatin silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription of ribosomal DNA by altering the structure of chromatin.
0006346	name:Name:methylation-dependent chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:methylation-dependent heterochromatic silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription by methylation of DNA, leading to the formation of heterochromatin.
0006348	name:Name:chromatin silencing at telomere	name:Synonym:heterochromatic silencing at telomere	name:Synonym:telomere chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:telomeric silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription of telomeric DNA by altering the structure of chromatin.
0030466	name:Name:chromatin silencing at silent mating-type cassette	name:Synonym:aging-dependent sterility	name:Synonym:chromatin silencing at HML and HMR	name:Synonym:heterochromatic silencing at silent mating-type cassette	name:Synonym:silent mating-type cassette chromatin silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription at silent mating-type loci by alteration of the structure of chromatin.
0030702	name:Name:chromatin silencing at centromere	name:Synonym:centromere chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:centromeric silencing	name:Synonym:heterochromatic silencing at centromere	info:Definition:Repression of transcription of centromeric DNA by altering the structure of chromatin.
0031048	name:Name:chromatin silencing by small RNA	name:Synonym:RNA interference-like chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated TGS	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated transcriptional silencing	name:Synonym:RNAi-directed chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:RNAi-like chromatin silencing	name:Synonym:small RNA-mediated heterochromatic silencing	info:Definition:Repression of transcription by conversion of large regions of DNA into heterochromatin, directed by small RNAs sharing sequence identity to the repressed region.
0010978	name:Name:gene silencing involved in chronological cell aging	info:Definition:Any transcriptional or post-transcriptional process, arising in non-dividing cells as they age, carried out at the cellular level that results in long-term gene inactivation.
0016441	name:Name:posttranscriptional gene silencing	name:Synonym:cosuppression	name:Synonym:PTGS	name:Synonym:quelling	info:Definition:The inactivation of gene expression by a posttranscriptional mechanism.
0010495	name:Name:long-distance posttranscriptional gene silencing	name:Synonym:long-distance propagation of posttranscriptional gene silencing	info:Definition:A posttranscriptional gene silencing process in which the silencing signal originates in a tissue separate from the tissue in which the silencing takes place.
0035194	name:Name:posttranscriptional gene silencing by RNA	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated posttranscriptional gene silencing	name:Synonym:sense-PTGS	info:Definition:Any process of posttranscriptional gene inactivation (silencing) mediated by small RNA molecules that may trigger mRNA degradation or negatively regulate translation.
0060145	name:Name:viral gene silencing in virus induced gene silencing	info:Definition:The posttranscriptional gene silencing of viral genes after viral infection.
0060146	name:Name:host gene silencing in virus induced gene silencing	info:Definition:The posttranscriptional gene silencing of host genes that are homologous to viral genes after viral infection.
0031047	name:Name:gene silencing by RNA	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated gene silencing	info:Definition:Any process in which RNA molecules inactivate expression of target genes.
0033562	name:Name:cotranscriptional gene silencing by small RNA	name:Synonym:small RNA-mediated cotranscriptional gene silencing	info:Definition:A process in which the targeting of nascent transcripts by the RITS complex mediates chromatin modifications and promotes the degradation of nascent transcripts synthesized in heterochromatic regions.
0019725	name:Name:cellular homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state at the level of the cell.
0006884	name:Name:cell volume homeostasis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell volume	info:Definition:Any process involved in maintaining the steady state of a cell's volume. The cell's volume refers to the three-dimensional space occupied by a cell.
0009992	name:Name:cellular water homeostasis	name:Synonym:cellular osmoregulation	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of water within a cell.
0045794	name:Name:negative regulation of cell volume	name:Synonym:cell regulatory volume decrease	name:Synonym:RVD	info:Definition:Any process that decreases cell volume.
0045795	name:Name:positive regulation of cell volume	info:Definition:Any process that increases cell volume.
0006973	name:Name:intracellular accumulation of glycerol	info:Definition:The accumulation of glycerol within a cell, for example by increased glycerol biosynthesis combined with decreased permeability of the cell membrane to glycerol, in response to the detection of a hyperosmotic environment.
0010992	name:Name:ubiquitin homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of ubiquitin monomers and free ubiquitin chains at the level of the cell.
0045454	name:Name:cell redox homeostasis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell redox homeostasis	name:Synonym:regulation of redox homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process that maintains the redox environment of a cell or compartment within a cell.
0046716	name:Name:muscle cell homeostasis	name:Synonym:muscle fiber maintenance	name:Synonym:muscle homeostasis	info:Definition:The cellular homeostatic process that preserves a muscle cell in a stable functional or structural state.
0055082	name:Name:cellular chemical homeostasis	info:Definition:Any biological process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of a chemical at the level of the cell.
0001678	name:Name:cellular glucose homeostasis	name:Synonym:cell glucose homeostasis	info:Definition:A cellular homeostatic process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of glucose within a cell or between a cell and its external environment.
0006873	name:Name:cellular ion homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of ions at the level of a cell.
0033502	name:Name:cellular galactose homeostasis	name:Synonym:cell galactose homeostasis	info:Definition:A cellular homeostatic process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of galactose within a cell or between a cell and its external environment.
0035356	name:Name:cellular triglyceride homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of triglyceride within a cell or between a cell and its external environment.
0042049	name:Name:cellular acyl-CoA homeostasis	name:Synonym:cell acyl-CoA homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of acyl-CoA within a cell or between a cell and its external environment.
0090156	name:Name:cellular sphingolipid homeostasis	info:Definition:Any biological process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of sphingolipids at the level of the cell.
0070050	name:Name:neuron homeostasis	name:Synonym:neuron maintenance	info:Definition:The cellular homeostatic process that preserves a neuron in a stable, differentiated functional and structural state.
0022402	name:Name:cell cycle process	info:Definition:A cellular process that is involved in the progression of biochemical and morphological phases and events that occur in a cell during successive cell replication or nuclear replication events.
0000073	name:Name:spindle pole body separation	info:Definition:A largely uncharacterized process involving the release of duplicated spindle pole bodies (SPBs) and their migration away from each other within the nuclear membrane. Duplicated SPBs are connected by a bridge structure that may be severed in order to release the SPBs from one another. Following liberation, SPBs diffuse through the nuclear membrane until they are across from each other. SPB separation must take place in order for a bipolar mitotic spindle to assemble.
0000082	name:Name:G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Progression from G1 phase to S phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000083	name:Name:regulation of transcription involved in G1/S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:G1/S-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter of G1/S-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription involved in G1/S-phase of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that regulates transcription such that the target genes are transcribed as part of the G1/S phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0071930	name:Name:negative regulation of transcription involved in G1/S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G1/S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter involved in G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that stop, prevents or decreases transcription as part of the G1/S transition of the mitotic cell cycle.
0071931	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription involved in G1/S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G1/S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter involved in G1/S transition of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases transcription as part of the G1/S transition of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000086	name:Name:G2/M transition of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Progression from G2 phase to M phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0071780	name:Name:mitotic cell cycle G2/M transition checkpoint	name:Synonym:mitotic G2/M checkpoint	info:Definition:A mitotic cell cycle checkpoint that blocks entry into M phase.
0000114	name:Name:regulation of transcription involved in G1 phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:G1-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G1 phase of cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that regulates transcription such that the target genes are transcribed as part of the G1 phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0060277	name:Name:negative regulation of transcription involved in G1 phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G1 phase of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that stop, prevents or decreases transcription as part of the G1 phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000115	name:Name:regulation of transcription involved in S phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during S-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription involved in S-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:S-phase-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:S-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that regulates transcription such that the target genes are transcribed as part of the S phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000116	name:Name:regulation of transcription involved in G2-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:G2-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II during G2-phase of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that regulates transcription such that the target genes are transcribed as part of the G2 phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000117	name:Name:regulation of transcription involved in G2/M-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:G2/M-specific transcription in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G2/M-phase of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that regulates transcription such that the target genes are transcribed as part of the G2/M phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0090282	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription involved in G2/M-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of G2/M-specific transcription in the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G2/M-phase of the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of transcription involved in G2/M-phase of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of G2/M-specific transcription in the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G2/M-phase of the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of G2/M-specific transcription in the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter during G2/M-phase of the mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of transcription involved in G2/M-phase of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription of target genes that are transcribed as part of the G2/M phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000212	name:Name:meiotic spindle organization	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle organisation	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:spindle organization during meiosis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the microtubule spindle during a meiotic cell cycle.
0051229	name:Name:meiotic spindle disassembly	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle breakdown	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle catabolism	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle degradation	name:Synonym:spindle breakdown during meiosis	name:Synonym:spindle degradation during meiosis	name:Synonym:spindle disassembly during meiosis	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the spindle during a meiotic cell cycle.
0090306	name:Name:spindle assembly involved in meiosis	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the spindle that contributes to the process of meiosis.
0000216	name:Name:M/G1 transition of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Progression from M phase to G1 phase of the mitotic cell cycle.
0000320	name:Name:re-entry into mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:The resumption of the mitotic cell division cycle by cells that were in a quiescent or other non-dividing state.
0000321	name:Name:re-entry into mitotic cell cycle after pheromone arrest	info:Definition:The resumption of the mitotic cell division cycle by pheromone-arrested cells that have not mated. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0045023	name:Name:G0 to G1 transition	info:Definition:The transition from the G0 quiescent state to the G1 phase. Under certain conditions, cells exit the cell cycle during G1 and remain in the G0 state as nongrowing, non-dividing (quiescent) cells. Appropriate stimulation of such cells induces them to return to G1 and resume growth and division. The G0 to G1 transition is accompanied by many changes in the program of gene expression.
0000706	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break processing	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the 5' to 3' exonucleolytic resection of the DNA at the site of the break to form a 3' single-strand DNA overhang occurs. This takes place during meiosis.
0010704	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break processing involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the 5' to 3' exonucleolytic resection of the DNA at the site of the break to form a 3' single-strand DNA overhang resulting in the transfer of genetic information from one helix to another.
0010705	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break processing involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the 5' to 3' exonucleolytic resection of the DNA at the site of the break to form a 3' single-strand DNA overhang occurs resulting in double strand break formation and repair through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0000707	name:Name:meiotic DNA recombinase assembly	info:Definition:During meiosis, the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of strand exchange proteins (recombinases) to form higher order oligomers on single-stranded DNA.
0007146	name:Name:meiotic recombination nodule assembly	info:Definition:During meiosis, the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of strand exchange proteins (recombinases) to form small, electron dense structures in association with meiotic chromosomes.
0010772	name:Name:meiotic DNA recombinase assembly involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of strand exchange proteins (recombinases) to form higher order oligomers on single-stranded DNA resulting in meiotic recombination. Meiotic recombination is the cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0010773	name:Name:meiotic DNA recombinase assembly involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of strand exchange proteins (recombinases) to form higher order oligomers on single-stranded DNA resulting in meiotic gene conversion. Meiotic gene conversion is the cell cycle process in which genetic information is transferred from one helix to another.
0000708	name:Name:meiotic strand invasion	name:Synonym:meiotic D-loop biosynthesis	name:Synonym:meiotic D-loop formation	name:Synonym:meiotic displacement loop biosynthesis	name:Synonym:meiotic displacement loop formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the nucleoprotein complex (composed of the broken single-strand DNA and the recombinase) searches and identifies a region of homology in intact duplex DNA. The broken single-strand DNA displaces the like strand and forms Watson-Crick base pairs with its complement, forming a duplex in which each strand is from one of the two recombining DNA molecules. This occurs during meiosis.
0010774	name:Name:meiotic strand invasion involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate resulting in meiotic recombination. Meiotic recombination is the cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0010775	name:Name:meiotic strand invasion involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate resulting in meiotic recombination.
0000709	name:Name:meiotic joint molecule formation	info:Definition:The conversion of the paired broken DNA and homologous duplex DNA into a four-stranded branched intermediate, known as a joint molecule, formed during meiotic recombination. These joint molecules contain Holliday junctions on either side of heteroduplex DNA.
0000710	name:Name:meiotic mismatch repair	info:Definition:A system for the identification and correction of base-base mismatches, small insertion-deletion loops, and regions of heterology that are present in duplex DNA formed with strands from two recombining molecules. Correction of the mismatch can result in non-Mendelian segregation of alleles following meiosis.
0010776	name:Name:meiotic mismatch repair involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:A system for the identification and correction of base-base mismatches, small insertion-deletion loops, and regions of heterology that are present in duplex DNA formed with strands from two recombining molecules resulting in meiotic gene conversion. Meiotic gene conversion is the cell cycle process in which genetic information is transferred from one helix to another.
0010777	name:Name:meiotic mismatch repair involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:A system for the identification and correction of base-base mismatches, small insertion-deletion loops, and regions of heterology that are present in duplex DNA formed with strands from two recombining molecules resulting in meiotic recombination. Meiotic recombination is the cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0000711	name:Name:meiotic DNA repair synthesis	info:Definition:During meiosis, the synthesis of DNA proceeding from the broken 3' single-strand DNA end that uses the homologous intact duplex as the template.
0010778	name:Name:meiotic DNA repair synthesis involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:The synthesis of DNA proceeding from the broken 3' single-strand DNA end that uses the homologous intact duplex as the template resulting in meiotic recombination. Meiotic recombination is the cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0010779	name:Name:meiotic DNA repair synthesis involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:The synthesis of DNA proceeding from the broken 3' single-strand DNA end that uses the homologous intact duplex as the template resulting in meiotic gene conversion. Meiotic gene conversion is the cell cycle process in which genetic information is transferred from one helix to another.
0000713	name:Name:meiotic heteroduplex formation	info:Definition:During meiosis, the formation of a stable duplex DNA that contains one strand from each of the two recombining DNA molecules.
0000714	name:Name:meiotic strand displacement	name:Synonym:meiotic D-loop dissociation	name:Synonym:meiotic D-loop processing	name:Synonym:meiotic displacement loop dissociation	name:Synonym:meiotic displacement loop processing	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the broken 3' single-strand DNA molecule that formed heteroduplex DNA with its complement in an intact duplex DNA is rejected. The Watson-Crick base pairing in the original duplex is restored. The rejected 3' single-strand DNA molecule reanneals with its original complement to reform two intact duplex molecules. This occurs during meiosis.
0006311	name:Name:meiotic gene conversion	name:Synonym:gene conversion without reciprocal crossover	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which genetic information is transferred from one helix to another. It often occurs in association with general genetic recombination events, and is believed to be a straightforward consequence of the mechanisms of general recombination and DNA repair. For example, meiosis might yield three copies of the maternal version of an allele and only one copy of the paternal allele, indicating that one of the two copies of the paternal allele has been changed to a copy of the maternal allele.
0007050	name:Name:cell cycle arrest	name:Synonym:arrest of cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:cessation of cell cycle	name:Synonym:termination of cell cycle	info:Definition:A regulatory process that halts progression through the cell cycle during one of the normal phases (G1, S, G2, M).
0000751	name:Name:cell cycle arrest in response to pheromone	info:Definition:The cell cycle regulatory process in which the cell cycle is halted during one of the normal phases (G1, S, G2, M) as a result of a pheromone stimulus. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0021883	name:Name:cell cycle arrest of committed forebrain neuronal progenitor cell	info:Definition:The process in which the cell cycle is halted during one of the normal phases (G1, S, G2, M) in a cell that has been committed to become a neuron that will reside in the forebrain.
0030996	name:Name:cell cycle arrest in response to nitrogen starvation	info:Definition:The process in which the cell cycle is halted during one of the normal phases (G1, S, G2, M) as a result of deprivation of nitrogen.
0070314	name:Name:G1 to G0 transition	name:Synonym:cell cycle quiescence	name:Synonym:establishment of cell quiescence	name:Synonym:G1/G0 transition	name:Synonym:stationary phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle arrest process that results in arrest during G1 phase, whereupon the cell enters a specialized resting state known as G0 or quiescence.
0071850	name:Name:mitotic cell cycle arrest	name:Synonym:arrest of mitotic cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:cessation of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:termination of mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:The process in which the mitotic cell cycle is halted during one of the normal phases (G1, S, G2, M).
0007052	name:Name:mitotic spindle organization	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle organisation	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:spindle organization and biogenesis during mitosis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the microtubule spindle during a mitotic cell cycle.
0030472	name:Name:mitotic spindle organization in nucleus	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle assembly	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle organisation in nucleus	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle organization and biogenesis in cell nucleus	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle organization and biogenesis in nucleus	name:Synonym:spindle organization and biogenesis in nucleus during mitosis	info:Definition:A process resulting in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the microtubule spindle in the nucleus. The process occurs during a mitotic cell cycle and takes place at the cellular level.
0051228	name:Name:mitotic spindle disassembly	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle breakdown	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle catabolism	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle degradation	name:Synonym:spindle breakdown during mitosis	name:Synonym:spindle degradation during mitosis	name:Synonym:spindle disassembly during mitosis	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the spindle during a mitotic cell cycle.
0090307	name:Name:spindle assembly involved in mitosis	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the spindle that contributes to the process of mitosis.
0007062	name:Name:sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome are joined along the entire length of the chromosome.
0007064	name:Name:mitotic sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome are joined along the entire length of the chromosome, from their formation in S phase through metaphase during a mitotic cell cycle. This cohesion cycle is critical for high fidelity chromosome transmission.
0051177	name:Name:meiotic sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome are joined along the entire length of the chromosome during meiosis.
0070601	name:Name:centromeric sister chromatid cohesion	name:Synonym:sister chromatid cohesion at centromere	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome are joined along the length of the centromeric region of the chromosome.
0007072	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription on exit from mitosis	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis	info:Definition:Any process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription as the cell leaves M phase. M phase is the part of the mitotic cell cycle during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place.
0007073	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase I promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from Pol I promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase I promoter	info:Definition:Any process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription from an RNA polymerase I promoter as the cell leaves M phase. M phase is the part of the mitotic cell cycle during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place.
0007074	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase II promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from Pol II promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase II promoter	info:Definition:Any process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription from an RNA polymerase II promoter as the cell leaves M phase. M phase is the part of the mitotic cell cycle during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place.
0007075	name:Name:positive regulation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase III promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from Pol III promoter	name:Synonym:activation of transcription on exit from mitosis, from RNA polymerase III promoter	info:Definition:Any process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of transcription from an RNA polymerase III promoter as the cell leaves M phase. M phase is the part of the mitotic cell cycle during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place.
0007076	name:Name:mitotic chromosome condensation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which chromatin structure is compacted prior to and during mitosis in eukaryotic cells.
0070550	name:Name:rDNA condensation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the chromatin structure of the rDNA repeats is compacted. In S. cerevisiae, condensation and resolution of the rDNA occurs during anaphase.
0007077	name:Name:mitotic nuclear envelope disassembly	name:Synonym:mitotic nuclear envelope breakdown	name:Synonym:mitotic nuclear envelope catabolism	name:Synonym:mitotic nuclear envelope degradation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the controlled breakdown of the nuclear envelope during mitotic cell division occurs.
0007078	name:Name:lamin depolymerization	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which lamin is depolymerized.
0007079	name:Name:mitotic chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome migration to spindle pole during mitosis	name:Synonym:chromosome movement towards spindle pole during mitosis	name:Synonym:mitotic chromosome movement	name:Synonym:mitotic chromosome movement to spindle pole	name:Synonym:mitotic sister chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:sister chromosome movement towards spindle pole during mitosis	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the directed movement of chromosomes from the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles occurs. This mediates by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes, during mitosis.
0007080	name:Name:mitotic metaphase plate congression	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate, a plane halfway between the poles of the mitotic spindle, during mitosis.
0007083	name:Name:mitotic chromosome decondensation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which chromosome structure is altered from the condensed form taken on during mitosis to the relaxed disperse form held in resting cells.
0007084	name:Name:mitotic nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process that results in reformation of the nuclear envelope during mitotic cell division.
0007086	name:Name:vesicle fusion with nuclear membrane involved in mitotic nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process that results in the joining of the lipid bilayer membrane around a vesicle with the lipid bilayer membrane around the nucleus, and contributes to mitotic nuclear envelope reassembly.
0007087	name:Name:mitotic nuclear pore complex reassembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which nuclear pore complexes reform during mitotic cell division.
0007091	name:Name:mitotic metaphase/anaphase transition	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which a cell progresses from metaphase to anaphase during mitosis, triggered by the destruction of mitotic cyclins.
0007098	name:Name:centrosome cycle	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which centrosome duplication and separation takes place. The centrosome cycle can operate with a considerable degree of independence from other processes of the cell cycle.
0007101	name:Name:male meiosis centrosome cycle	name:Synonym:centrosome cycle involved in male meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Centrosome duplication and separation in the context of a meiotic cell cycle in a male organism.
0007131	name:Name:reciprocal meiotic recombination	name:Synonym:female meiotic recombination	name:Synonym:gene conversion with reciprocal crossover	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate. This results in the equal exchange of genetic material between non-sister chromatids in a pair of homologous chromosomes. These reciprocal recombinant products ensure the proper segregation of homologous chromosomes during meiosis I and create genetic diversity.
0007348	name:Name:regulation of syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:control of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:modulation of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:syncytial blastoderm cell cycle control	name:Synonym:syncytial blastoderm cell cycle modulation	name:Synonym:syncytial blastoderm cell cycle regulation	name:Synonym:syncytial blastoderm cell cycle regulator	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that modulates the rate or extent of the progression through the syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle.
0046003	name:Name:negative regulation of syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down-regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:downregulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:inhibition of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle progression	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the rate or extent of progression through the syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle.
0046004	name:Name:positive regulation of syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of syncytial blastoderm cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:stimulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:upregulation of progression through syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of progression through the syncytial blastoderm mitotic cell cycle.
0008315	name:Name:meiotic G2/MI transition	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which a cell progresses from meiotic prophase to metaphase I.
0009920	name:Name:cell plate formation involved in plant-type cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell plate formation involved in cellulose and pectin-containing cell wall biogenesis	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the cell plate is formed at the equator of the spindle in the dividing cells during early telophase. An example of this is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010458	name:Name:exit from mitosis	info:Definition:The cell cycle process where a cell leaves M phase. M phase is the part of the mitotic cell cycle during which mitosis and cytokinesis take place.
0016344	name:Name:meiotic chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome migration to spindle pole during meiosis	name:Synonym:chromosome movement towards spindle pole during meiosis	name:Synonym:meiotic chromosome movement	name:Synonym:meiotic chromosome movement to spindle pole	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the directed movement of chromosomes from the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles takes place, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes. This occurs during meiosis.
0016345	name:Name:female meiotic chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome movement towards spindle pole during female meiosis	name:Synonym:female meiotic chromosome movement	name:Synonym:female meiotic chromosome movement to spindle pole	info:Definition:The directed movement of chromosomes in the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes, during female meiosis.
0016346	name:Name:male meiotic chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome movement towards spindle pole during male meiosis	name:Synonym:male meiotic chromosome movement	name:Synonym:male meiotic chromosome movement to spindle pole	info:Definition:The directed movement of chromosomes in the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes, during male meiosis.
0051758	name:Name:homologous chromosome movement towards spindle pole involved in homologous chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:homologous chromosome movement towards spindle pole during meiosis I	name:Synonym:meiosis I, homologous chromosome movement towards spindle pole	info:Definition:The directed movement of homologous chromosomes from the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes, that contributes to meiosis I.
0051759	name:Name:sister chromosome movement towards spindle pole involved in meiotic sister chromatid segregation	name:Synonym:meiosis II, sister chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:sister chromosome movement towards spindle pole during meiosis II	info:Definition:The directed movement of sister chromosomes from the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes, during meiosis II.
0022403	name:Name:cell cycle phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through one of the biochemical and morphological phases and events that occur during successive cell replication or nuclear replication events.
0000236	name:Name:mitotic prometaphase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through prometaphase, the stage following prophase in mitosis (in higher eukaryotes) during which the nuclear envelope is disrupted and breaks into membrane vesicles, and the spindle microtubules enter the nuclear region. Kinetochores mature on each centromere and attach to some of the spindle microtubules. Kinetochore microtubules begin the process of aligning chromosomes in one plane halfway between the poles.
0000237	name:Name:leptotene	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the first stage of prophase I in meiosis, in which chromosomes first become visible.
0000238	name:Name:zygotene	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the second stage of prophase I in meiosis, in which each chromosome pairs with its homolog; the two become aligned and crossing over may occur.
0000239	name:Name:pachytene	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the third stage of prophase I in meiosis, in which crossing over occurs between a chromatid in one partner and another chromatid in the homologous chromosome.
0000240	name:Name:diplotene	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the fourth stage of prophase I in meiosis, in which the homologous chromosomes begin to separate and the synaptonemal complex dissolves.
0000241	name:Name:diakinesis	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the final stage of prophase I in meiosis; the transition to meiotic metaphase I.
0000279	name:Name:M phase	name:Synonym:M-phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through M phase, the part of the cell cycle comprising nuclear division.
0007067	name:Name:mitosis	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides; the process involves condensation of chromosomal DNA into a highly compacted form. Canonically, mitosis produces two daughter nuclei whose chromosome complement is identical to that of the mother cell.
0007126	name:Name:meiosis	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the nuclear division phase of a meiotic cell cycle, the specialized nuclear and cell division in which a single diploid cell undergoes two nuclear divisions following a single round of DNA replication in order to produce four daughter cells that contain half the number of chromosomes as the diploid cell. Meiotic division occurs during the formation of gametes from diploid organisms and at the beginning of haplophase in those organisms that alternate between diploid and haploid generations.
0007127	name:Name:meiosis I	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the first phase of meiosis, in which cells divide and homologous chromosomes are paired and segregated from each other, producing two daughter cells.
0007135	name:Name:meiosis II	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through the second phase of meiosis, in which cells divide and separate the two chromatids in each chromosome.
0051318	name:Name:G1 phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through G1 phase, one of two 'gap' phases in the cell cycle; G1 is the interval between the completion of DNA segregation (usually by mitosis or meiosis) and the beginning of DNA synthesis.
0051319	name:Name:G2 phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through G2 phase, one of two 'gap' phases in the cell cycle; G2 is the interval between the completion of DNA synthesis and the beginning of DNA segregation (usually by mitosis or meiosis).
0051320	name:Name:S phase	name:Synonym:S-phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through S phase, the part of the cell cycle during which DNA synthesis takes place.
0051322	name:Name:anaphase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through anaphase, the third stage of chromosome segregation in the cell cycle. Canonically, sister chromatids (or homologous chromosomes) separate and migrate towards the poles of the spindle.
0051323	name:Name:metaphase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through metaphase, the second stage of chromosome segregation in the cell cycle. Canonically, chromosomes become aligned on the equatorial plate of the cell.
0051324	name:Name:prophase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through prophase, the first stage of chromosome segregation in the cell cycle. Canonically, chromosomes condense and the two daughter centrioles and their asters migrate toward the poles of the cell.
0051325	name:Name:interphase	name:Synonym:karyostasis	name:Synonym:resting phase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through interphase, the stage of cell cycle between successive rounds of chromosome segregation. Canonically, interphase is the stage of the cell cycle during which the biochemical and physiologic functions of the cell are performed and replication of chromatin occurs.
0051326	name:Name:telophase	info:Definition:A cell cycle process comprising the steps by which a cell progresses through telophase, the last stage of chromosome segregation in the cell cycle. Canonically, telophase begins when the chromosomes arrive at the poles of the cell and the division of the cytoplasm starts.
0030037	name:Name:actin filament reorganization involved in cell cycle	name:Synonym:actin filament reorganization during cell cycle	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which rearrangement of the spatial distribution of actin filaments and associated proteins occurs.
0030474	name:Name:spindle pole body duplication	name:Synonym:spindle pole body assembly	name:Synonym:spindle pole body biogenesis	name:Synonym:spindle pole body biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spindle pole body formation	name:Synonym:spindle pole body replication	info:Definition:Construction of a new spindle pole body.
0007103	name:Name:spindle pole body duplication in nuclear envelope	info:Definition:Construction of a new spindle pole body adjacent to the existing spindle pole body in the nuclear envelope; usually occurs about the time of bud emergence. An example of this is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0031046	name:Name:spindle pole body duplication in cytoplasm	info:Definition:Construction of a new spindle pole body adjacent to the existing spindle pole body exterior to the outer nuclear envelope.
0030989	name:Name:dynein-driven meiotic oscillatory nuclear movement	name:Synonym:HNM	name:Synonym:horsetail movement	name:Synonym:horsetail nuclear movement	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which oscillatory movement of the nucleus during meiotic prophase I occurs. This oscillatory movement is led by an astral microtubule array emanating from the spindle pole body, and driven by the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein. It is known to play a central role in meiotic recombination and homologous chromosome pairing; as observed in S. pombe.
0030999	name:Name:linear element assembly	name:Synonym:linear element formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which a proteinaceous scaffold, related to the synaptonemal complex, is assembled in association with S. pombe chromosomes during meiotic prophase.
0031134	name:Name:sister chromatid biorientation	name:Synonym:chromosome biorientation	name:Synonym:sister kinetochore biorientation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which sister chromatids establish stable attachments to microtubules emanating from opposite spindle poles.
0031566	name:Name:contractile ring maintenance involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, contractile ring maintenance, involved in cytokinesis during cell cycle	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the contractile ring is maintained in response to the cytokinesis checkpoint; that is when cytokinesis is delayed awaiting completion of nuclear division or the correct formation of cytokinetic structures. This process occurs in the context of cytokinesis that takes place as part of a cell cycle.
0034085	name:Name:establishment of sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome become joined along the entire length of the chromosome during S phase.
0034087	name:Name:establishment of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome become joined along the entire length of the chromosome during S phase during a mitotic cell cycle.
0034089	name:Name:establishment of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The process in which the sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome become joined along the entire length of the chromosome during S phase during a meiotic cell cycle.
0034086	name:Name:maintenance of sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The process in which the association between sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome is maintained as chromosomes condense, attach to the spindle in a bipolar orientation, and congress to the metaphase plate.
0034088	name:Name:maintenance of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion	name:Synonym:mitotic cohesion stability	info:Definition:The process in which the association between sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome is maintained as chromosomes condense, attach to the spindle in a bipolar orientation, and congress to the metaphase plate during a mitotic cell cycle.
0034090	name:Name:maintenance of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion	info:Definition:The process in which the association between sister chromatids of a replicated chromosome is maintained as chromosomes condense, attach to the spindle in a bipolar orientation, and congress to the metaphase plate during a meiotic cell cycle.
0034500	name:Name:rDNA separation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which rDNA repeat regions are physically detached from each other during chromosome separation.
0034510	name:Name:centromere separation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which centromeres are physically detached from each other during chromosome separation.
0051756	name:Name:meiotic sister chromatid centromere separation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the centromeres of sister chromatids are physically detached from each other during meiosis.
0040001	name:Name:establishment of mitotic spindle localization	name:Synonym:establishment of mitotic spindle localisation	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle positioning	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle positioning and orientation	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle positioning or orientation	name:Synonym:spindle positioning during mitosis	name:Synonym:spindle positioning involved in mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the directed movement of the mitotic spindle to a specific location in the cell occurs.
0000132	name:Name:establishment of mitotic spindle orientation	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle orientation during mitosis	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle orientation involved in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:mitotic spindle orientation	name:Synonym:orienting of mitotic spindle	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that sets the alignment of mitotic spindle relative to other cellular structures.
0042023	name:Name:DNA endoreduplication	name:Synonym:DNA endoreplication	name:Synonym:DNA re-duplication	info:Definition:Regulated re-replication of DNA within a single cell cycle, resulting in an increased cell ploidy. An example of this process occurs in the synthesis of Drosophila salivary gland cell polytene chromosomes.
0042138	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double-strand breaks are generated at defined hotspots throughout the genome during meiosis I. This results in the initiation of meiotic recombination.
0010780	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break formation involved in reciprocal meiotic recombination	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double-strand breaks are generated at defined hotspots throughout the genome during meiosis I resulting in meiotic recombination. Meiotic recombination is the cell cycle process in which double strand breaks are formed and repaired through a double Holliday junction intermediate.
0010781	name:Name:meiotic DNA double-strand break formation involved in meiotic gene conversion	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which double-strand breaks are generated at defined hotspots throughout the genome during meiosis I resulting in meiotic gene conversion. Meiotic gene conversion is the cell cycle process in which genetic information is transferred from one helix to another.
0043147	name:Name:meiotic spindle stabilization	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle integrity is maintained during M phase of meiosis.
0043148	name:Name:mitotic spindle stabilization	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle integrity is maintained during M phase of mitosis.
0051026	name:Name:chiasma assembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which a connection between chromatids assembles, indicating where an exchange of homologous segments has taken place by the crossing-over of non-sister chromatids.
0051078	name:Name:meiotic nuclear envelope disassembly	name:Synonym:meiotic nuclear envelope breakdown	name:Synonym:meiotic nuclear envelope catabolism	name:Synonym:meiotic nuclear envelope degradation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the controlled breakdown of the nuclear envelope during meiotic cell division occurs.
0051079	name:Name:meiosis I nuclear envelope disassembly	name:Synonym:meiosis I nuclear envelope breakdown	name:Synonym:meiosis I nuclear envelope catabolism	name:Synonym:meiosis I nuclear envelope degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the nuclear envelope during the first division of meiosis.
0051080	name:Name:meiosis II nuclear envelope disassembly	name:Synonym:meiosis II nuclear envelope breakdown	name:Synonym:meiosis II nuclear envelope catabolism	name:Synonym:meiosis II nuclear envelope degradation	info:Definition:The controlled breakdown of the nuclear envelope during the second division of meiosis.
0051295	name:Name:establishment of meiotic spindle localization	name:Synonym:establishment of meiotic spindle localisation	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle positioning	name:Synonym:spindle positioning during meiosis	name:Synonym:spindle positioning involved in meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the directed movement of the meiotic spindle to a specific location in the cell occurs.
0051296	name:Name:establishment of meiotic spindle orientation	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle orientation during meiosis	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle orientation involved in meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:meiotic spindle orientation	name:Synonym:orienting of meiotic spindle	info:Definition:Any process that set the alignment of meiotic spindle relative to other cellular structures.
0051300	name:Name:spindle pole body organization	name:Synonym:SPB maturation	name:Synonym:SPB organization	name:Synonym:spindle pole body maturation	name:Synonym:spindle pole body organisation	name:Synonym:spindle pole body organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the spindle pole body (SPB). The SPB is the microtubule organizing center in fungi, and is functionally homologous to the animal cell centrosome.
0031322	name:Name:ascospore-type prospore-specific spindle pole body remodeling	name:Synonym:ascospore-type prospore-specific spindle pole body modification	name:Synonym:ascospore-type prospore-specific spindle pole body remodelling	name:Synonym:forespore specific spindle pole body remodeling	name:Synonym:forespore-specific spindle pole body remodeling	name:Synonym:prospore-specific spindle pole body remodeling	name:Synonym:sporulation-specific spindle pole body remodeling	info:Definition:A spindle pole body (SPB) organization process that takes place during the second meiotic division during ascospore formation and results in the structural reorganization of the SPB; includes the recruitment of sporulation-specific proteins to the outer plaque to form the meiotic outer plaque (MOP).
0051304	name:Name:chromosome separation	name:Synonym:chromatid release	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which paired chromosomes are detached from each other. Chromosome separation begins with the release of cohesin complexes from chromosomes; in budding yeast, this includes the cleavage of cohesin complexes along the chromosome arms, followed by the separation of the centromeric regions. Chromosome separation also includes formation of chromatid axes mediated by condensins, and ends with untanglement of inter-sister catenation catalyzed by topoisomerase II (topo II).
0051306	name:Name:mitotic sister chromatid separation	name:Synonym:chromosome separation during mitosis	name:Synonym:mitotic chromosome separation	name:Synonym:mitotic sister chromatid resolution	name:Synonym:sister chromatid separation during mitosis	info:Definition:The process in which sister chromatids are physically detached from each other during mitosis.
0051307	name:Name:meiotic chromosome separation	name:Synonym:chromosome separation during meiosis	name:Synonym:meiotic chromosome resolution	info:Definition:The process in which chromosomes are physically detached from each other during meiosis.
0071139	name:Name:resolution of recombination intermediates	info:Definition:The cleavage and rejoining of intermediates, such as Holliday junctions, formed during DNA recombination to produce two intact molecules in which genetic material has been exchanged.
0051311	name:Name:meiotic metaphase plate congression	name:Synonym:metaphase plate congression during meiosis	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate, a plane halfway between the poles of the meiotic spindle, during meiosis.
0043060	name:Name:meiotic metaphase I plate congression	info:Definition:The alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate, a plane halfway between the poles of the meiotic spindle, during meiosis I.
0043061	name:Name:meiotic metaphase II plate congression	info:Definition:The alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate, a plane halfway between the poles of the meiotic spindle, during meiosis II.
0051314	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to mitotic chromosome	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with a chromosome during mitosis.
0051315	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in mitotic sister chromatid segregation	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore during mitosis	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in mitosis	name:Synonym:mitotic bipolar attachment	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with the proteins making up the kinetochore complex during mitosis. During mitosis, the kinetochores of sister chromosomes are situated facing opposite spindle poles and bipolar attachment of the sister chromosomes to the spindle occurs.
0051316	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in meiotic chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore during meiosis	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore during meiotic chromosome segregation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with the proteins making up the kinetochore complex contributing to meiotic chromosome segregation.
0051455	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in homologous chromosome segregation	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore during meiosis I	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in meiosis I	name:Synonym:monopolar attachment	name:Synonym:sister kinetochore monoorientation	info:Definition:The process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with the proteins making up the kinetochore complex during meiosis I. During meiosis I sister kinetochores are lying next to each other facing the same spindle pole and monopolar attachment of the chromatid to the spindle occurs.
0051456	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in meiotic sister chromatid segregation	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore during meiosis II	name:Synonym:attachment of spindle microtubules to kinetochore involved in meiosis II	name:Synonym:meiotic bipolar attachment	info:Definition:The process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with the proteins making up the kinetochore complex during meiosis II. During meiosis II sister kinetochores are situated facing opposite spindle poles and bipolar attachment of the sister chromosomes to the spindle occurs.
0051317	name:Name:attachment of spindle microtubules to meiotic chromosome	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which spindle microtubules become physically associated with a chromosome during meiosis.
0031619	name:Name:homologous chromosome orientation involved in meiotic metaphase I plate congression	name:Synonym:homologous chromosome orientation during meiosis	name:Synonym:homologous chromosome orientation during meiosis I	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the sister centromeres of one chromosome attach to microtubules that emanate from the same spindle pole, which ensures that homologous maternal and paternal chromosomes are pulled in opposite directions at anaphase of meiosis I.
0051333	name:Name:meiotic nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the reformation of the nuclear envelope during meiosis occurs.
0051334	name:Name:meiosis I nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The reformation of the nuclear envelope during meiosis I.
0051335	name:Name:meiosis II nuclear envelope reassembly	info:Definition:The reformation of the nuclear envelope during meiosis II.
0051439	name:Name:regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:mitotic anaphase-promoting complex regulator	name:Synonym:mitotic APC regulator	name:Synonym:mitotic SCF complex regulator	name:Synonym:mitotic ubiquitin ligase regulator	name:Synonym:mitotic ubiquitin-protein ligase regulator	name:Synonym:regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ubiquitin ligase activity that contributes to the mitotic cell cycle.
0051436	name:Name:negative regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:anaphase promoting complex inhibition during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:anaphase-promoting complex inhibition during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:APC inhibition during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down-regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:downregulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:inhibition of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:mitotic anaphase promoting complex inhibition	name:Synonym:mitotic anaphase promoting complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:mitotic anaphase-promoting complex inhibition	name:Synonym:mitotic anaphase-promoting complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:mitotic APC inhibition	name:Synonym:mitotic APC inhibitor	name:Synonym:mitotic SCF complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:mitotic ubiquitin ligase inhibitor	name:Synonym:negative regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of ubiquitin ligase activity that contributes to the mitotic cell cycle.
0051437	name:Name:positive regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:mitotic SCF complex activator	name:Synonym:mitotic ubiquitin ligase activator	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:stimulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:upregulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during mitotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates, maintains or increases the rate of ubiquitin ligase activity that contributes to the mitotic cell cycle.
0051440	name:Name:regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:meiotic anaphase-promoting complex regulator	name:Synonym:meiotic APC regulator	name:Synonym:meiotic SCF complex regulator	name:Synonym:meiotic ubiquitin ligase regulator	name:Synonym:meiotic ubiquitin-protein ligase regulator	name:Synonym:regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:A cell cycle process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ubiquitin ligase activity during the meiotic cell cycle.
0051441	name:Name:positive regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:activation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:meiotic SCF complex activator	name:Synonym:meiotic ubiquitin ligase activator	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:stimulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:upregulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates, maintains or increases the rate of ubiquitin ligase activity during the meiotic cell cycle.
0051442	name:Name:negative regulation of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity involved in meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:anaphase promoting complex inhibition during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:anaphase-promoting complex inhibition during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:APC inhibition during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:down-regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:downregulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:inhibition of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:meiotic anaphase promoting complex inhibition	name:Synonym:meiotic anaphase promoting complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:meiotic anaphase-promoting complex inhibition	name:Synonym:meiotic anaphase-promoting complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:meiotic APC inhibition	name:Synonym:meiotic APC inhibitor	name:Synonym:meiotic SCF complex inhibitor	name:Synonym:meiotic ubiquitin ligase inhibitor	name:Synonym:negative regulation of ubiquitin ligase activity during meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of ubiquitin ligase activity during the meiotic cell cycle.
0051653	name:Name:spindle localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of spindle localization	name:Synonym:spindle localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which is the spindle is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0051755	name:Name:meiotic sister chromatid arm separation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which sister chromatid arms are physically detached from each other during meiosis.
0051878	name:Name:lateral element assembly	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which lateral elements are formed. Axial elements form a proteinaceous core between the two sister chromatids of each chromosome; the two axial elements then connect along their entire lengths by fine fibers known as transverse filaments, forming the lateral elements.
0060184	name:Name:cell cycle switching	info:Definition:The process in which a cell switches cell cycle mode.
0051727	name:Name:cell cycle switching, meiotic to mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:cell cycle switching, meiosis to mitosis	name:Synonym:conversion to mitosis	name:Synonym:conversion to mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:entry into mitosis	name:Synonym:entry into mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:initiation of mitosis	name:Synonym:initiation of mitotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:mitotic entry	info:Definition:The process in which a cell switches cell cycle mode from meiotic to mitotic division.
0051728	name:Name:cell cycle switching, mitotic to meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:cell cycle switching, mitotis to meiosis	name:Synonym:conversion to meiosis	name:Synonym:conversion to meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:entry into meiosis	name:Synonym:entry into meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:initiation of meiosis	name:Synonym:initiation of meiotic cell cycle	name:Synonym:meiotic entry	info:Definition:The process in which a cell switches cell cycle mode from mitotic to meiotic division.
0070192	name:Name:chromosome organization involved in meiosis	name:Synonym:meiotic chromosome organization	info:Definition:A process of chromosome organization that is involved in meiosis.
0007129	name:Name:synapsis	name:Synonym:chromosomal pairing	name:Synonym:chromosomal synapsis	name:Synonym:homologous chromosome pairing at meiosis	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the side by side pairing and physical juxtaposition of homologous chromosomes is created at the metaphase plate.
0007130	name:Name:synaptonemal complex assembly	name:Synonym:synaptonemal complex formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the synaptonemal complex is formed. This is a structure that holds paired chromosomes together during prophase I of meiosis and that promotes genetic recombination.
0010032	name:Name:meiotic chromosome condensation	name:Synonym:chromosome condensation involved in meiotic cell cycle	info:Definition:Compaction of chromatin structure prior to meiosis in eukaryotic cells.
0045141	name:Name:meiotic telomere clustering	name:Synonym:bouquet biosynthesis	name:Synonym:bouquet formation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which the dynamic reorganization of telomeres occurs in early meiotic prophase, during which meiotic chromosome ends are gathered in a bouquet arrangement at the inner surface of the nuclear envelope proximal to the spindle pole body. This plays an important role in homologous chromosome pairing and therefore progression through meiosis.
0051178	name:Name:meiotic chromosome decondensation	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which chromosome structure is altered from the condensed form held during meiosis to the relaxed dispersed form held in resting cells.
0070197	name:Name:attachment of telomeres to nuclear envelope	info:Definition:The cell cycle process in which physical connections are formed between telomeres and the nuclear envelope, facilitating bouquet formation.
0022406	name:Name:membrane docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a membrane or protein to a target membrane. Docking requires only that the proteins come close enough to interact and adhere.
0016240	name:Name:autophagic vacuole docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of an autophagic vacuole membrane to the target membrane, mediated by proteins protruding from the membrane of the vesicle and the target membrane. Docking requires only that the two membranes come close enough for these proteins to interact and adhere.
0022614	name:Name:membrane to membrane docking	name:Synonym:membrane-membrane docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a membrane to a target membrane, mediated by proteins protruding from the two membranes. Docking requires only that the membranes come close enough for the proteins to interact and adhere.
0071562	name:Name:nucleus-vacuole junction assembly	name:Synonym:nucleus-vacuole junction formation	name:Synonym:NV junction assembly	name:Synonym:NV junction formation	name:Synonym:NVJ assembly	name:Synonym:NVJ formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a nucleus-vacuole junction, which are membrane contact sites formed between the vacuole membrane and the outer nuclear membrane. In S. cerevisiae these contacts are mediated through direct physical interaction between Vac8p and Nvj1p.
0022615	name:Name:protein to membrane docking	name:Synonym:protein-membrane docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a protein to a target membrane, mediated by a proteins protruding from the target membrane. Docking requires only that the proteins come close enough to interact and adhere.
0006615	name:Name:SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane, docking	name:Synonym:protein docking during SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane	name:Synonym:SRP-dependent cotranslational membrane targeting, docking	name:Synonym:SRP-dependent cotranslational protein-membrane targeting, docking	info:Definition:The process in which an SRP-bound ribosome forms a complex with the SRP receptor in the ER membrane, allowing the ribosome to bind to the membrane, during cotranslational membrane targeting.
0048278	name:Name:vesicle docking	name:Synonym:vesicle to membrane docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a transport vesicle membrane to the target membrane, mediated by proteins protruding from the membrane of the vesicle and the target membrane. Docking requires only that the two membranes come close enough for these proteins to interact and adhere.
0006904	name:Name:vesicle docking involved in exocytosis	name:Synonym:vesicle docking during exocytosis	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a vesicle membrane to a target membrane, mediated by proteins protruding from the membrane of the vesicle and the target membrane, that contributes to exocytosis.
0048211	name:Name:Golgi vesicle docking	name:Synonym:dictyosome vesicle docking to target membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi vesicle docking with target membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi vesicle to membrane docking	name:Synonym:Golgi-derived vesicle docking	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a Golgi transport vesicle membrane to a target membrane, mediated by proteins protruding from the membrane of the Golgi vesicle and the target membrane.
0090384	name:Name:phagosome-lysosome docking	name:Synonym:lysosome recruitment to phagosome	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a phagosome membrane to a lysosome membrane. Docking requires only that the proteins come close enough to interact and adhere.
0090388	name:Name:phagosome-lysosome docking involved in apoptotic cell clearance	info:Definition:The initial attachment of a phagosome membrane to a lysosome membrane that occurs as a part of apoptotic cell clearance. Docking requires only that the proteins come close enough to interact and adhere.
0023061	name:Name:signal release	info:Definition:The process in which a signal is secreted or discharged into the extracellular medium from a cellular source.
0001820	name:Name:serotonin secretion	name:Synonym:5-HT secretion	name:Synonym:5-hydroxytryptamine secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of serotonin by a cell or group of cells. Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT) is a monoamine synthesised in serotonergic neurons in the central nervous system, enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract and some immune system cells.
0002442	name:Name:serotonin secretion involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:serotonin secretion involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The regulated release of serotonin by a cell or group of cells as part of an inflammatory response.
0060096	name:Name:serotonin secretion, neurotransmission	info:Definition:The regulated release of serotonin by a cell or group of cells, in which released serotonin acts as a neurotransmitter.
0007269	name:Name:neurotransmitter secretion	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter release	info:Definition:The regulated release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. A neurotransmitter is any of a group of substances that are released on excitation from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell. Among the many substances that have the properties of a neurotransmitter are acetylcholine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine, glycine, gamma-aminobutyrate, glutamic acid, substance P, enkephalins, endorphins and serotonin.
0014055	name:Name:acetylcholine secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of acetylcholine by a cell or group of cells. The acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that acts in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system (CNS).
0014860	name:Name:neurotransmitter secretion involved in regulation of skeletal muscle contraction	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter secretion involved in control of skeletal muscle contraction	info:Definition:The regulated release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft involved in skeletal muscle contraction. A neurotransmitter is any of a group of substances that are released on excitation from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell. Among the many substances that have the properties of a neurotransmitter are acetylcholine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, dopamine, glycine, gamma aminobutyrate, glutamic acid, substance P, enkephalins, endorphins and serotonin.
0048790	name:Name:maintenance of presynaptic active zone structure	info:Definition:The process in which a neuronal cell maintains the organization and the arrangement of proteins at the active zone to ensure the fusion and dock of vesicles and the release of neurotransmitters.
0048791	name:Name:calcium ion-dependent exocytosis of neurotransmitter	info:Definition:The release of a neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft, where the release step is dependent on the presence of calcium ions (Ca2+). The neurotransmitter is contained within a membrane-bounded vesicle, and is released by fusion of the vesicle with the presynaptic plasma membrane of a nerve cell.
0048792	name:Name:calcium ion-independent exocytosis of neurotransmitter	info:Definition:The release of a neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft, where the release step is independent of the presence of calcium ions (Ca2+). The neurotransmitter is contained within a membrane-bounded vesicle, and is released by fusion of the vesicle with the presynaptic plasma membrane of a nerve cell.
0071911	name:Name:synchronous neurotransmitter secretion	info:Definition:Release of neurotransmitter at the synapse that lasts for just a few milliseconds after action potential invasion.
0071912	name:Name:asynchronous neurotransmitter secretion	info:Definition:Release of neurotransmitter at the synapse that persists for tens to hundreds of milliseconds after action potential invasion.
0014046	name:Name:dopamine secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of dopamine by a cell or group of cells. Dopamine is a catecholamine and a precursor of adrenaline and noradrenaline. It acts as a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system but it is also produced peripherally and acts as a hormone.
0014047	name:Name:glutamate secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of glutamate by a cell or group of cells. The glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system.
0014051	name:Name:gamma-aminobutyric acid secretion	name:Synonym:GABA secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of gamma-aminobutyric acid by a cell or group of cells. The gamma-aminobutyric acid is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain but is also found in several extraneural tissues.
0046879	name:Name:hormone secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of hormones, substances with a specific regulatory effect on a particular organ or group of cells.
0002441	name:Name:histamine secretion involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:histamine secretion involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The regulated release of histamine by a cell or group of cells as part of an inflammatory response.
0030072	name:Name:peptide hormone secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of a peptide hormone from a cell or organ.
0032333	name:Name:activin secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of activin, a nonsteroidal regulator composed of two covalently linked beta subunits, which is synthesized in the pituitary gland and gonads and stimulates the secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone.
0043396	name:Name:corticotropin-releasing hormone secretion	name:Synonym:corticotropin-releasing factor secretion	name:Synonym:CRF secretion	name:Synonym:CRH secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. CRH is produced by the hypothalamus and stimulates corticotropic cells of the anterior lobe of the pituitary to produce corticotropic hormone (CTH) and other biologically active substances e.g. 2-endorphin, release of CRH is affected by serum levels of cortisol, by stress and by the sleep/wake cycle.
0060986	name:Name:endocrine hormone secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of a hormone into the circulatory system.
0061355	name:Name:Wnt protein secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a Wnt protein from a cell or group of cells.
0061359	name:Name:regulation of Wnt receptor signaling pathway by Wnt protein secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of Wnt receptor signalling pathway by Wnt protein secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of the Wnt receptor mediated signaling pathway by the controlled release of a Wnt protein from a cell or group of cells.
0030029	name:Name:actin filament-based process	name:Synonym:microfilament-based process	info:Definition:Any cellular process that depends upon or alters the actin cytoskeleton, that part of the cytoskeleton comprising actin filaments and their associated proteins.
0030036	name:Name:actin cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:actin cytoskeleton organisation	name:Synonym:actin cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:actin modulating activity	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising actin filaments and their associated proteins.
0007015	name:Name:actin filament organization	name:Synonym:actin filament organisation	name:Synonym:regulation of actin filament localization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising actin filaments. Includes processes that control the spatial distribution of actin filaments, such as organizing filaments into meshworks, bundles, or other structures, as by cross-linking.
0021818	name:Name:modulation of the microfilament cytoskeleton involved in cell locomotion in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:modulation of the microfilament cytoskeleton involved in cell locomotion in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:The changes in the actin cytoskeleton that are necessary for the movement of cells along radial glial cells as a component of the process of cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial cell migration.
0030047	name:Name:actin modification	info:Definition:Covalent modification of an actin molecule.
0030866	name:Name:cortical actin cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:cortical actin cytoskeleton organisation	name:Synonym:cortical actin cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of actin-based cytoskeletal structures in the cell cortex, i.e. just beneath the plasma membrane.
0031032	name:Name:actomyosin structure organization	name:Synonym:actomyosin organization	name:Synonym:actomyosin structure organisation	name:Synonym:actomyosin structure organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures containing both actin and myosin or paramyosin. The myosin may be organized into filaments.
0031033	name:Name:myosin filament organization	name:Synonym:myosin filament assembly or disassembly	name:Synonym:myosin polymerization or depolymerization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a filament composed of myosin molecules.
0031532	name:Name:actin cytoskeleton reorganization	name:Synonym:actin cytoskeleton remodeling	name:Synonym:actin cytoskeleton reorganisation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in dynamic structural changes to the arrangement of constituent parts of cytoskeletal structures comprising actin filaments and their associated proteins.
0061204	name:Name:paramyosin filament assembly or disassembly	info:Definition:The formation or disassembly of a filament composed of paramyosin molecules.
0030048	name:Name:actin filament-based movement	info:Definition:Movement of organelles or other particles along actin filaments, or sliding of actin filaments past each other, mediated by motor proteins.
0030050	name:Name:vesicle transport along actin filament	info:Definition:Movement of a vesicle along an actin filament, mediated by motor proteins.
0031022	name:Name:nuclear migration along microfilament	name:Synonym:nuclear migration, microfilament-mediated	info:Definition:The directed movement of the nucleus along microfilaments within the cell, mediated by motor proteins.
0033275	name:Name:actin-myosin filament sliding	name:Synonym:actin filament sliding	info:Definition:The sliding movement of actin thin filaments and myosin thick filaments past each other.
0034642	name:Name:mitochondrion migration along actin filament	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration along actin filament	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration along microfilament	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration, actin-mediated	name:Synonym:mitochondrion migration along microfilament	name:Synonym:mitochondrion transport along actin filament	info:Definition:The directed movement of a mitochondrion along a microfilament, mediated by motor proteins.
0060327	name:Name:cytoplasmic actin-based contraction involved in cell motility	info:Definition:The actin filament-based movement by which cytoplasmic actin filaments slide past one another resulting in a contraction that propels the cell from one place to another.
0051014	name:Name:actin filament severing	name:Synonym:actin filament severing activity	name:Synonym:barbed-end actin capping/severing activity	name:Synonym:F-actin severing	info:Definition:The process in which an actin filament is broken down into smaller filaments.
0071846	name:Name:actin filament debranching	info:Definition:An actin filament severing process that results in the removal of actin filament branches specifically at the branch points.
0060476	name:Name:protein localization involved in acrosome reaction	name:Synonym:protein localisation involved in acrosome reaction	info:Definition:The actin-based process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location in the sperm as part of the acrosome reaction.
0070252	name:Name:actin-mediated cell contraction	info:Definition:The actin filament-based process in which cytoplasmic actin filaments slide past one another resulting in contraction of all or part of the cell body.
0003383	name:Name:apical constriction	info:Definition:The actin-mediated process that results in the contraction of the apical end of a polarized columnar epithelial cell.
0006932	name:Name:substrate-dependent cell migration, cell contraction	name:Synonym:substrate-bound cell migration, cell contraction	info:Definition:The translocation of the cell body forward during cell migration, mediated by tractional force on its substrate and tension in the cortical cytoskeleton. Adhesions transmit propulsive forces and serve as traction points over which the cell moves.
0032196	name:Name:transposition	info:Definition:Any process involved in mediating the movement of discrete segments of DNA between nonhomologous sites.
0006313	name:Name:transposition, DNA-mediated	name:Synonym:Class II transposition	name:Synonym:cut-and-paste transposition	name:Synonym:DNA transposition	name:Synonym:P-element excision	name:Synonym:P-element transposition	name:Synonym:Tc1/mariner transposition	name:Synonym:Tc3 transposition	info:Definition:Any process involved in a type of transpositional recombination which occurs via a DNA intermediate.
0032197	name:Name:transposition, RNA-mediated	name:Synonym:Class I transposition	name:Synonym:retrotransposition	name:Synonym:retrotransposon transposition	name:Synonym:RNA-mediated transposition	name:Synonym:Tf transposition	name:Synonym:Ty element transposition	name:Synonym:Ty1 element transposition	name:Synonym:Ty2 element transposition	name:Synonym:Ty3 element transposition	info:Definition:Any process involved in a type of transpositional recombination which occurs via an RNA intermediate.
0032198	name:Name:MITE transposition	name:Synonym:Class III transposition	info:Definition:Any process involved in the transposition of miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements (MITEs).
0070893	name:Name:transposon integration	info:Definition:Any process in which a transposable element is incorporated into another DNA molecule such as a chromosome.
0032506	name:Name:cytokinetic process	info:Definition:A cellular process that is involved in the division of the cytoplasm of a cell and its separation into two daughter cells.
0000912	name:Name:assembly of actomyosin apparatus involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:actomyosin apparatus assembly involved in cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, formation of actomyosin apparatus	name:Synonym:formation of actomyosin apparatus involved in cytokinesis	info:Definition:The assembly and arrangement of an apparatus composed of actin, myosin, and associated proteins that will function in cytokinesis.
0000914	name:Name:phragmoplast assembly	name:Synonym:phragmoplast formation	info:Definition:The formation of a structure composed of actin, myosin, and associated proteins that will function in cytokinesis in cells that perform cytokinesis by cell plate formation. The structure usually contains antiparallel microtubules and membrane (often visible as vesicles).
0000915	name:Name:cytokinesis, actomyosin contractile ring assembly	name:Synonym:constriction ring assembly	name:Synonym:contractile ring assembly	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, actomyosin contractile ring formation	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, actomyosin ring biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, actomyosin ring formation	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, contractile ring assembly	info:Definition:The process of assembly of a ring composed of actin, myosin, and associated proteins that will function in cytokinesis.
0000916	name:Name:contractile ring contraction involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:contractile ring constriction	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, actomyosin ring contraction	name:Synonym:cytokinesis, contractile ring contraction	info:Definition:The process of an actomyosin ring getting smaller in diameter, in the context of cytokinesis that takes place as part of a cell cycle.
0000917	name:Name:barrier septum formation	name:Synonym:barrier septum assembly	name:Synonym:formation of barrier septum	name:Synonym:septation	name:Synonym:septin assembly and septum biosynthesis	name:Synonym:septin assembly and septum formation	info:Definition:The assembly and arrangement of a septum that spans the plasma membrane interface between progeny cells following cytokinesis. The progeny cells that form a barrier septum are not able to exchange intracellular material.
0071937	name:Name:barrier septum formation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	info:Definition:A barrier septum formation process that occurs during, and contributes to, cytokinesis that occurs in the context of cell cycle progression.
0000918	name:Name:barrier septum site selection	name:Synonym:selection of site for barrier cell septum biosynthesis	name:Synonym:selection of site for barrier cell septum formation	name:Synonym:selection of site for barrier septum formation	name:Synonym:septin assembly and septum biosynthesis	name:Synonym:septin assembly and septum formation	name:Synonym:septum positioning	info:Definition:The process of marking the site where a barrier septum will form.
0000919	name:Name:cell plate assembly	name:Synonym:cell plate formation	info:Definition:The process of assembly, maturation, and growth of the cell plate to the cell periphery in cells that divide by cell plate formation; often involves deposition of cell wall material in and around the phragmoplast.
0000920	name:Name:cytokinetic cell separation	name:Synonym:cell separation during cytokinesis	name:Synonym:rotokinesis	info:Definition:The process of physically separating progeny cells during cytokinesis; this may involve enzymatic digestion of septum or cell wall components.
2000695	name:Name:cytokinetic cell separation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cell separation during cytokinesis of cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cell separation during cytokinesis of cytokinesis involved in cell cycle	name:Synonym:cytokinetic cell separation of cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinetic cell separation of cytokinesis involved in cell cycle	name:Synonym:rotokinesis of cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:rotokinesis of cytokinesis involved in cell cycle	info:Definition:Any cytokinetic cell separation that is involved in cell cycle cytokinesis.
0007105	name:Name:cytokinesis, site selection	name:Synonym:site selection involved in cytokinesis	info:Definition:The process of marking the place where cytokinesis will occur.
0000913	name:Name:preprophase band assembly	name:Synonym:preprophase band formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the preprophase band, a dense band of microtubules that marks the position in the cell where cytokinesis will occur in cells that perform cytokinesis by cell plate formation.
0010687	name:Name:site selection involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	info:Definition:The process of marking the place where cytokinesis will occur in the context of cell cycle progression.
0007108	name:Name:cytokinesis, initiation of separation	name:Synonym:initiation of separation involved in cytokinesis	info:Definition:The process involved in starting cell separation.
0007109	name:Name:cytokinesis, completion of separation	name:Synonym:completion of separation involved in cytokinesis	info:Definition:The process of finishing cell separation, which results in two physically separated cells.
0030994	name:Name:primary cell septum disassembly	name:Synonym:hydrolysis of primary cell septum	name:Synonym:primary cell septum hydrolysis	name:Synonym:primary septum hydrolysis	info:Definition:Dissolution of the primary septum during cell separation.
0031671	name:Name:primary cell septum biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a primary cell septum following nuclear division.
0031991	name:Name:regulation of contractile ring contraction involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:regulation of contractile ring contraction involved in cytokinesis during cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of contraction of the actomyosin ring involved in cytokinesis that takes place as part of a cell cycle.
0031028	name:Name:septation initiation signaling cascade	name:Synonym:septation initiation network	name:Synonym:septation initiation signaling	name:Synonym:septation initiation signalling	name:Synonym:SIN	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals, mediated by the small GTPase Ras, that results in the initiation of contraction of the contractile ring, at the beginning of cytokinesis and cell division by septum formation. The pathway coordinates chromosome segregation with mitotic exit and cytokinesis.
0032130	name:Name:medial membrane band assembly	name:Synonym:medial membrane band formation	info:Definition:The assembly of a sterol-rich region of the plasma membrane at the cell surface overlying the contractile ring.
0032186	name:Name:cellular bud neck septin ring organization	info:Definition:Control of the formation, spatial distribution, and breakdown of a septin ring located at the bud neck.
0032187	name:Name:contractile ring localization involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:contractile ring localisation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	info:Definition:The process in which a contractile ring is assembled and/or maintained in a specific location, in the context of cytokinesis that takes place as part of a cell cycle.
0032188	name:Name:establishment of contractile ring localization involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:actomyosin ring positioning	name:Synonym:contractile ring positioning	name:Synonym:cytokinesis site selection by contractile ring positioning	name:Synonym:establishment of contractile ring localisation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:establishment of contractile ring localization involved in cytokinesis during cell cycle	info:Definition:The process in which a contractile ring is assembled in a specific location as part of a process of cell cycle cytokinesis.
0032189	name:Name:maintenance of contractile ring localization involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:cytokinetic ring anchoring	name:Synonym:maintenance of contractile ring localisation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:maintenance of contractile ring localization involved in cytokinesis during cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process in which a contractile ring is maintained in a location and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0032940	name:Name:secretion by cell	name:Synonym:cellular secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a substance by a cell.
0009306	name:Name:protein secretion	name:Synonym:glycoprotein secretion	name:Synonym:protein secretion during cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:protein secretion resulting in cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The controlled release of proteins from a cell or group of cells.
0002001	name:Name:renin secretion into blood stream	name:Synonym:renin release into blood stream	info:Definition:The regulated release of renin into the blood stream by juxtoglomerular cells.
0015628	name:Name:protein secretion by the type II secretion system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the general secretion pathway	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the general secretory pathway	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T2S	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T2SS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type II protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type II protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are secreted across the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria by the type II secretion system. Proteins using this pathway are first translocated across the cytoplasmic membrane via the Sec or Tat pathways.
0030253	name:Name:protein secretion by the type I secretion system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the TOSS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type I protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type I protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are secreted into the extracellular milieu via the type I secretion system; secretion occurs in a continuous process without the distinct presence of periplasmic intermediates and does not involve proteolytic processing of secreted proteins.
0030254	name:Name:protein secretion by the type III secretion system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T3S	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T3SS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the TTSS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type III protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type III protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are transferred into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells by the bacterial type III secretion system; secretion occurs in a continuous process without the distinct presence of periplasmic intermediates and does not involve proteolytic processing of secreted proteins.
0030255	name:Name:protein secretion by the type IV secretion system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T4SS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type IV protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type IV protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are transferred into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells, via the type IV protein secretion system.
0033103	name:Name:protein secretion by the type VI secretion system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the T6SS	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type VI protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type VI protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are transferred into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells by the type VI secretion system. Proteins secreted by this system do not require an N-terminal signal sequence.
0033299	name:Name:secretion of lysosomal enzymes	info:Definition:The controlled release of lysosomal enzymes by a cell or group of cells.
0044315	name:Name:protein secretion by the type VII secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins are transferred into the extracellular milieu or directly into host cells, via the type VII protein secretion system.
0046819	name:Name:protein secretion by the type V secretion system	name:Synonym:autotransporter system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the autotransporter system	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the type V protein secretion system	name:Synonym:type V protein secretion system	info:Definition:The process in which proteins mediate their own secretion across the outer membrane through a beta-barrel pore structure formed by the C-terminal domain of the protein precursor. Following passage across the outer membrane, the mature protein is released from the pore by an autocatalytic activity. Proteins secreted by the Type V system are first translocated across the plasma membrane by the Sec pathway.
0048305	name:Name:immunoglobulin secretion	name:Synonym:antibody secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of immunoglobulins from a B cell or plasma cell, whose mechanism includes the use of alternate polyadenylylation signals to favor the biosynthesis of secreted forms of immunoglobulin over membrane-bound immunoglobulin.
0050663	name:Name:cytokine secretion	name:Synonym:interferon secretion	name:Synonym:interleukin secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of cytokines from a cell or group of cells. Cytokines are any of a group of proteins that function to control the survival, growth and differentiation of tissues and cells, and which have autocrine and paracrine activity.
0070560	name:Name:protein secretion by platelet	info:Definition:The regulated release of proteins by a platelet or group of platelets.
0010585	name:Name:glutamine secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of glutamine by a cell, a group of cells, or a tissue.
0044097	name:Name:secretion by the type IV secretion system	name:Synonym:secretion via the type IV secretion system	info:Definition:The controlled release of proteins or DNA by a cell, via the type IV secretion system.
0044098	name:Name:DNA secretion by the type IV secretion system	name:Synonym:DNA secretion via the type IV secretion system	info:Definition:The controlled release of DNA by a cell, via the type IV secretion system.
0050432	name:Name:catecholamine secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of catecholamines by a cell or group of cells. The catecholamines are a group of physiologically important biogenic amines that possess a catechol (3,4-dihydroxyphenyl) nucleus and are derivatives of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine.
0048242	name:Name:epinephrine secretion	name:Synonym:adrenaline secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of epinephrine by a cell or group of cells. Epinephrine is a catecholamine hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla and a neurotransmitter, released by certain neurons and active in the central nervous system.
0048243	name:Name:norepinephrine secretion	name:Synonym:noradrenaline secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of norepinephrine by a cell or group of cells. Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and it acts as a hormone and as a neurotransmitter of most of the sympathetic nervous system.
0061033	name:Name:secretion by lung epithelial cell involved in lung growth	name:Synonym:fetal lung liquid secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of liquid by a lung epithelial cell that contributes to an increase in size of the lung as part of its development.
0070278	name:Name:extracellular matrix constituent secretion	name:Synonym:ECM constituent secretion	name:Synonym:ECM secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of molecules that form the extracellular matrix, including carbohydrates and glycoproteins by a cell or a group of cells.
0070468	name:Name:dentine secretion	name:Synonym:dentin secretion	name:Synonym:predentin secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release by odontoblasts of the extracellular matrix constituents, including collagen, that form the basis of dentine.
0033059	name:Name:cellular pigmentation	info:Definition:The deposition or aggregation of coloring matter in a cell.
0043482	name:Name:cellular pigment accumulation	info:Definition:The aggregation of coloring matter in a particular location in a cell, occurring in response to some external stimulus.
0048757	name:Name:pigment granule maturation	info:Definition:Steps required to form a membrane-bounded organelle into a pigment granule containing pigment. Maturation is a developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a cell or structure to attain its fully functional state.
0034330	name:Name:cell junction organization	name:Synonym:cell junction assembly and maintenance	name:Synonym:cell junction biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cell junction. A cell junction is a specialized region of connection between two cells or between a cell and the extracellular matrix.
0034329	name:Name:cell junction assembly	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a cell junction.
0007043	name:Name:cell-cell junction assembly	name:Synonym:intercellular junction assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a junction between cells.
0007044	name:Name:cell-substrate junction assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a junction between a cell and its substrate.
0034333	name:Name:adherens junction assembly	name:Synonym:adherens junction formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form an adherens junction. An adherens junction is a cell junction at which the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane is attached to actin filaments.
0034331	name:Name:cell junction maintenance	info:Definition:The organization process that preserves a cell junction in a stable functional or structural state. A cell junction is a specialized region of connection between two cells or between a cell and the extracellular matrix.
0034334	name:Name:adherens junction maintenance	info:Definition:The maintenance of an adherens junction. An adherens junction is a cell junction at which the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane is attached to actin filaments.
0045217	name:Name:cell-cell junction maintenance	name:Synonym:intercellular junction maintenance	info:Definition:The maintenance of junctions between cells.
0045216	name:Name:cell-cell junction organization	name:Synonym:cell-cell junction assembly and maintenance	name:Synonym:cell-cell junction biogenesis	name:Synonym:intercellular junction assembly and maintenance	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cell-cell junction. A cell-cell junction is a specialized region of connection between two cells.
0009663	name:Name:plasmodesma organization	name:Synonym:plasmodesma organisation	name:Synonym:plasmodesma organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:plasmodesmata organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a plasmodesma, a fine cytoplasmic channel, found in all higher plants, that connects the cytoplasm of one cell to that of an adjacent cell.
0034332	name:Name:adherens junction organization	name:Synonym:adherens junction assembly and maintenance	name:Synonym:adherens junction organisation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an adherens junction. An adherens junction is a cell junction at which the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane is attached to actin filaments.
0035212	name:Name:cell competition in a multicellular organism	info:Definition:Competitive interactions within multicellular organisms between cell populations that differ in growth rates, leading to the elimination of the slowest-growing cells.
0035633	name:Name:maintenance of blood-brain barrier	name:Synonym:maintenance of BBB	info:Definition:Preserving the permeability barrier between the blood and the brain in a stable functional or structural state. The cells in the brain are packed tightly together preventing the passage of most molecules from the blood into the brain. Only lipid soluble molecules or those that are actively transported can pass through the blood-brain barrier.
0035638	name:Name:signal maturation	name:Synonym:ligand maturation	info:Definition:Any process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of a signal. A signal is a physical entity or change in state that is used to transfer information to trigger a response, and is functional when it can activate a receptor.
0007225	name:Name:patched ligand maturation	name:Synonym:Hedgehog protein processing	name:Synonym:hh protein processing	name:Synonym:patched ligand processing	info:Definition:The posttranslational modification of members of the Hedgehog family of signaling proteins in order for Hedgehog to exert its biological activity. These modifications include cleavage of its signal sequence, autocatalytic protein cleavage and the attachment of sterol groups.
0038004	name:Name:epidermal growth factor receptor ligand maturation	name:Synonym:EGFR ligand maturation	info:Definition:Any process leading to the attainment of the full functional capacity of a ligand for an epidermal growth factor receptor. The ligand is functional when it can bind to and activate an epidermal growth factor receptor.
0045103	name:Name:intermediate filament-based process	info:Definition:Any cellular process that depends upon or alters the intermediate filament cytoskeleton, that part of the cytoskeleton comprising intermediate filaments and their associated proteins.
0045104	name:Name:intermediate filament cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:intermediate filament cytoskeleton organisation	name:Synonym:intermediate filament cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising intermediate filaments and their associated proteins.
0045109	name:Name:intermediate filament organization	name:Synonym:intermediate filament organisation	info:Definition:Control of the spatial distribution of intermediate filaments; includes organizing filaments into meshworks, bundles, or other structures, as by cross-linking.
0060052	name:Name:neurofilament cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:neurofilament cytoskeleton organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cytoskeletal structures comprising neurofilaments and their associated proteins.
0048610	name:Name:cellular process involved in reproduction	name:Synonym:reproductive cellular process	info:Definition:A process, occurring at the cellular level, that is involved in the reproductive function of a multicellular or single-celled organism.
0000728	name:Name:gene conversion at mating-type locus, DNA double-strand break formation	info:Definition:The site-specific endonucleolytic cleavage of DNA at the mating-type locus which initiates the conversion of one mating-type allele to another.
0000734	name:Name:gene conversion at mating-type locus, DNA repair synthesis	info:Definition:Synthesis of DNA that proceeds from the broken 3' single-strand DNA end uses the homologous intact duplex as the template during gene conversion at the mating-type locus.
0000735	name:Name:removal of nonhomologous ends	info:Definition:The removal of nonhomologous sequences at the broken 3' single-strand DNA end before DNA repair synthesis can occur.
0000736	name:Name:double-strand break repair via single-strand annealing, removal of nonhomologous ends	info:Definition:During DSBR via single-strand annealing, the removal of nonhomologous sequences at the broken 3' single-strand DNA end before DNA repair synthesis can occur.
0000742	name:Name:karyogamy involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:karyogamy during conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:During sexual reproduction, the creation of a single nucleus from multiple nuclei as a result of fusing the lipid bilayers that surround each nuclei. This occurs after cytogamy.
0000743	name:Name:nuclear migration involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:nuclear congression	name:Synonym:nuclear migration during conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:The net movement of nuclei towards one another as a prelude to karyogamy in organisms undergoing conjugation with cellular fusion.
0000749	name:Name:response to pheromone involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:response to pheromone during conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pheromone stimulus that contributes to the process of conjugation with cellular fusion. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0000754	name:Name:adaptation of signaling pathway by response to pheromone involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:adaptation of signalling pathway by response to pheromone involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:adaptation to pheromone during conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:desensitization to pheromone during conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:In organisms that undergo conjugation with cellular fusion, the process resulting in desensitization following exposure to pheromone stimulus that act to down-regulate further stimulation or block initial conjugation responses. An example of this is the adaptation to pheromone during conjugation with cellular fusion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0000752	name:Name:agglutination involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:agglutination	name:Synonym:cell-cell adhesion during conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:cell-cell adhesion during mating	info:Definition:During conjugation with cellular fusion, the aggregation or adhesion of compatible mating types via complementary cell-cell interactions. An example of this process is agglutination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0000753	name:Name:cell morphogenesis involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:shmoo orientation	name:Synonym:shmooing	info:Definition:The change in form (cell shape and size) that occurs during sexual reproduction in order to facilitate direct contact between the compatible mating types in organisms that undergo conjugation cellular fusion.
0001549	name:Name:cumulus cell differentiation	name:Synonym:ovarian cumulus cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a subpopulation of granulosa cells surrounding the oocyte acquires the specialized features of an ovarian cumulus cell.
0001552	name:Name:ovarian follicle atresia	info:Definition:Ovarian follicle demise mediated by apoptosis.
0001556	name:Name:oocyte maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an oocyte to attain its fully functional state. Oocyte maturation commences after reinitiation of meiosis commonly starting with germinal vesicle breakdown, and continues up to the second meiotic arrest prior to fertilization.
0002077	name:Name:acrosome matrix dispersal	info:Definition:The proteolytic digestion of components in the acrosomal matrix that allows for their release into the egg. The dispersal of the components allows for the inner acrosomal membrane to interact with the egg.
0007277	name:Name:pole cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pole cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007278	name:Name:pole cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a pole cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007281	name:Name:germ cell development	name:Synonym:germ-cell development	name:Synonym:primordial germ cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an immature germ cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure (gamete). A germ cell is any reproductive cell in a multicellular organism.
0007286	name:Name:spermatid development	name:Synonym:spermatid cell development	name:Synonym:spermiogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a spermatid over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048599	name:Name:oocyte development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an oocyte over time, from initial commitment of the cell to its specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0007282	name:Name:cystoblast division	name:Synonym:cystoblast cell division	info:Definition:The four rounds of incomplete mitosis undergone by the cystoblast to form a 16-cell cyst. Within the cyst, one cell differentiates into an oocyte while the rest become nurse cells. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0048142	name:Name:germarium-derived cystoblast division	name:Synonym:cystoblast cell division	info:Definition:The four rounds of incomplete mitosis undergone by a cystoblast derived from the germarium to form a 16-cell cyst. Within the cyst, one cell differentiates into an oocyte while the rest become nurse cells. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007284	name:Name:spermatogonial cell division	info:Definition:The mitotic divisions of the primary spermatogonial cell (a primordial male germ cell) to form a cyst of secondary spermatogonia (primary spermatocytes).
0007287	name:Name:Nebenkern assembly	name:Synonym:Nebenkern formation	info:Definition:Fusion of mitochondria during insect spermatid differentiation to form two masses, which wrap around each other to form a densely packed sphere called the Nebenkern.
0007288	name:Name:sperm axoneme assembly	info:Definition:The assembly and organization of the sperm flagellar axoneme, the bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of the eukaryotic sperm flagellum, and is responsible for movement.
0007289	name:Name:spermatid nucleus differentiation	name:Synonym:spermatid nuclear differentiation	info:Definition:The specialization of the spermatid nucleus during the development of a spermatid into a mature male gamete competent for fertilization.
0007290	name:Name:spermatid nucleus elongation	name:Synonym:spermatid nuclear elongation	info:Definition:The change in shape of the spermatid nucleus from a spherical structure to an elongated organelle, during the latter part of spermatid differentiation.
0007294	name:Name:germarium-derived oocyte fate determination	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte identity	name:Synonym:oocyte cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a germarium-derived cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an oocyte cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007296	name:Name:vitellogenesis	name:Synonym:yolk production	info:Definition:The production of yolk. Yolk is a mixture of materials used for embryonic nutrition.
0007297	name:Name:ovarian follicle cell migration	name:Synonym:follicle cell migration	info:Definition:The directed movement of an ovarian follicle cell that takes place during oogenesis. During egg chamber formation, follicle cells migrate to envelop the germ-line cysts and move in between cysts. At stage 10B, follicle cells migrate centripetally between the nurse cells and the oocyte, enclosing the anterior of the egg. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007298	name:Name:border follicle cell migration	name:Synonym:border cell migration	info:Definition:The directed movement of a border cell through the nurse cells to reach the oocyte. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0060269	name:Name:centripetally migrating follicle cell migration	info:Definition:The cell migration process in which a follicle cell migrates as part of an epithelial sheet between the nurse cells and the oocyte. At the end of migration, they cover the anterior of the oocyte.
0060270	name:Name:main body follicle cell migration	info:Definition:The ovarian follicle cell migration process in which follicle cells migrate posteriorly to form a columnar epithelium over the oocyte.
0007301	name:Name:female germline ring canal formation	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal formation	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal formation	info:Definition:Assembly of the intercellular bridges that connect the germ-line cells of a female cyst.
0007302	name:Name:nurse cell nucleus anchoring	info:Definition:Attachment of the nurse cell nucleus to the plasma membrane.
0007308	name:Name:oocyte construction	name:Synonym:oocyte arrangement	info:Definition:The synthesis, deposition, and organization of the materials in a cell of an ovary; where the cell can then undergo meiosis and form an ovum. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007315	name:Name:pole plasm assembly	info:Definition:Establishment of the specialized cytoplasm found at the poles of the egg. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007340	name:Name:acrosome reaction	info:Definition:The discharge, by sperm, of a single, anterior secretory granule following the sperm's attachment to the zona pellucida surrounding the oocyte. The process begins with the fusion of the outer acrosomal membrane with the sperm plasma membrane and ends with the exocytosis of the acrosomal contents into the egg.
0007344	name:Name:pronuclear fusion	info:Definition:The merging of two pronuclei in a fertilized egg to fuse and produce a single zygotic genome.
0007531	name:Name:mating type determination	info:Definition:Any process that establishes and transmits the specification of mating type upon an individual. Mating types are the equivalent in microorganisms of the sexes in higher organisms.
0007532	name:Name:regulation of transcription, mating-type specific	name:Synonym:mating-type specific transcriptional control	info:Definition:Any mating-type specific process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of transcription.
0007533	name:Name:mating type switching	name:Synonym:mating type switching and recombination	info:Definition:The conversion of a single-cell organism from one mating type to another by the precise replacement of a DNA sequence at the expressed mating type locus with a copy of a sequence from a donor locus.
0007534	name:Name:gene conversion at mating-type locus	info:Definition:The conversion of the mating-type locus from one allele to another resulting from the recombinational repair of a site-specific double-strand break at the mating-type locus with information from a silent donor sequence. There is no reciprocal exchange of information because the mating-type locus copies information from the donor sequence and the donor sequence remains unchanged.
0007535	name:Name:donor selection	name:Synonym:donor preference	info:Definition:The process that determines which donor locus a cell uses, in preference to another, in mating type switching.
0007536	name:Name:activation of recombination (HML)	info:Definition:The activation of recombination at a mating type locus, such that it is used in preference to the other donor locus for mating type switching; exemplified by the HML locus and surrounding sequences on Chromosome III in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0007537	name:Name:inactivation of recombination (HML)	info:Definition:The inactivation of recombination at sequences around a mating type donor locus, with the consequence that the other donor is the only one available for mating type switching; exemplified by the HML locus and surrounding sequences on Chromosome III in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0008302	name:Name:female germline ring canal formation, actin assembly	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal formation, actin assembly	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal formation, actin assembly	name:Synonym:ring canal formation, actin assembly	info:Definition:Recruitment and organization of actin filaments in female germline ring canals.
0008335	name:Name:female germline ring canal stabilization	name:Synonym:nurse cell ring canal stabilization	name:Synonym:ovarian ring canal stabilization	info:Definition:Maintenance of the structural integrity of the ring canals connecting the female germline cyst.
0008354	name:Name:germ cell migration	name:Synonym:germ-cell migration	name:Synonym:primordial germ cell migration	info:Definition:The orderly movement of a cell specialized to produce haploid gametes through the embryo from its site of production to the place where the gonads will form.
0007280	name:Name:pole cell migration	info:Definition:The directed movement of a pole cell (germline progenitors in insects) from its site of production at the posterior pole of the embryo through to the site where the gonads will form.
0009560	name:Name:embryo sac egg cell differentiation	name:Synonym:female gamete generation	name:Synonym:female gametophyte egg cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an uncellularized embryo sac nucleus cellularizes and acquires the specialized features of an egg cell. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0009994	name:Name:oocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:oocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized immature germ cell acquires the specialized features of a mature female gamete.
0030706	name:Name:germarium-derived oocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:oocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which one relatively unspecialized immature cystocyte of the germ-line cyst in the germarium acquires the specialized features of an oocyte. An example of this process can be found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0010198	name:Name:synergid death	name:Synonym:synergid cell death	name:Synonym:synergid degeneration	info:Definition:Synergid cells undergo degeneration and death in response to penetration by the pollen tube. It is an active process that involves a dramatic decrease in cell volume, collapse of the vacuoles, and complete disintegration of the plasma membrane and most organelles.
0010234	name:Name:tapetal cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a tapetal cell of anthers in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0010344	name:Name:seed oilbody biogenesis	name:Synonym:oleosome biogenesis	name:Synonym:seed oil body organization	name:Synonym:spherosome biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a seed oilbody. Seed oilbodies are simple organelles comprising a matrix of triglyceride surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer embedded and covered with unique proteins called oleosins. Seed oilbodies supply the energy requirements for the growth of the seedling after germination.
0010480	name:Name:microsporocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:pollen mother cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a microsporocyte cell over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell. A microsporocyte is a diploid (2n) cell that undergoes meiosis and forms four haploid (1n) microspores; also called microspore mother cell and, in seed plants, pollen mother cell.
0010654	name:Name:apical cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into an apical cell. The apical cell is the upper cell formed after the first division of the zygote.
0010708	name:Name:heteroduplex formation involved in gene conversion at mating-type locus	info:Definition:The formation of a stable duplex DNA that contains one strand from each of the two recombining DNA molecules resulting in the conversion of the mating-type locus from one allele to another.
0016325	name:Name:oocyte microtubule cytoskeleton organization	name:Synonym:oocyte microtubule cytoskeleton organisation	info:Definition:Formation and maintenance of a polarized microtubule array originating from a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) in the oocyte. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0019047	name:Name:provirus integration	name:Synonym:prophage integration	info:Definition:The molecular events that lead to the integration of a viral genome into the host genome.
0019065	name:Name:receptor-mediated endocytosis of virus by host	name:Synonym:receptor mediated endocytosis by host of virus particle	name:Synonym:receptor mediated endocytosis of virus by host	name:Synonym:receptor mediated endocytosis of virus particle by host	name:Synonym:viral receptor mediated endocytosis	info:Definition:A receptor-mediated endocytosis process in which a host cell takes up a virus particle; successive instances of virus endocytosis result in the accumulation of virus particles within the cell.
0019068	name:Name:virion assembly	name:Synonym:viral assembly	name:Synonym:viral particle assembly	name:Synonym:virus assembly	name:Synonym:virus particle assembly	info:Definition:A late phase of viral replication during which all the components necessary for the formation of a mature virion collect at a particular site in the cell and the basic structure of the virus particle is formed.
0042963	name:Name:phage assembly	name:Synonym:bacteriophage assembly	info:Definition:A late phase of bacteriophage replication during which all the components necessary for the formation of a mature virion collect at a particular site in the bacterial cell and the basic structure of the virus particle is formed.
0019069	name:Name:viral capsid assembly	info:Definition:The assembly of a virus capsid from its protein subunits.
0019073	name:Name:viral DNA genome packaging	info:Definition:The packing of viral DNA into a capsid.
0019083	name:Name:viral transcription	info:Definition:The mechanisms involved in viral gene transcription, especially referring to those with temporal properties unique to viral transcription.
0019084	name:Name:(delayed) early viral mRNA transcription	name:Synonym:beta protein	info:Definition:The second round of viral gene transcription; most genes transcribed in this round are necessary for genome replication.
0019085	name:Name:immediate early viral mRNA transcription	name:Synonym:alpha protein	info:Definition:The transcriptional period of the earliest expressed viral genes, mainly encoding transcriptional regulators.
0019086	name:Name:late viral mRNA transcription	name:Synonym:gamma protein	info:Definition:The last group of viral genes to be transcribed during the viral life cycle; genes consist mainly of those encoding structural proteins.
0019094	name:Name:pole plasm mRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of mRNA localization in pole plasm	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of pole plasm mRNA localization	name:Synonym:oocyte pole plasm mRNA localization	name:Synonym:pole granule RNA localization	name:Synonym:pole plasm mRNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which mRNA is transported to, or maintained in, the oocyte pole plasm. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0045451	name:Name:pole plasm oskar mRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of oskar mRNA localization in pole plasm	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of pole plasm oskar mRNA localization	name:Synonym:oocyte pole plasm oskar mRNA localization	name:Synonym:pole plasm oskar mRNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which oskar mRNA is transported to, or maintained in, the oocyte pole plasm.
0022412	name:Name:cellular process involved in reproduction in multicellular organism	name:Synonym:reproductive cellular process in multicellular organism	info:Definition:A process, occurring at the cellular level, that is involved in the reproductive function of a multicellular organism.
0001675	name:Name:acrosome assembly	name:Synonym:acrosome formation	info:Definition:The formation of the acrosome from the spermatid Golgi.
0007306	name:Name:eggshell chorion assembly	name:Synonym:eggshell chorion formation	name:Synonym:insect chorion formation	info:Definition:Construction of the chorion portion of the eggshell, which comprises the channels for gas exchange in an insect eggshell.
0007307	name:Name:eggshell chorion gene amplification	info:Definition:Amplification by up to 60-fold of the loci containing the chorion gene clusters. Amplification is necessary for the rapid synthesis of chorion proteins by the follicle cells, and occurs by repeated firing of one or more origins located within each gene cluster.
0007342	name:Name:fusion of sperm to egg plasma membrane	name:Synonym:sperm-oocyte fusion	info:Definition:The binding and fusion of a sperm, having penetrated the zona pellucida, with the plasma membrane of the oocyte. Binding occurs at the posterior (post-acrosomal) region of the sperm head.
0009829	name:Name:cell wall modification involved in ripening	name:Synonym:cell wall modification during ripening	info:Definition:The series of events resulting in chemical or structural alterations of existing cell walls that contribute to ripening.
0035803	name:Name:egg coat formation	name:Synonym:VE formation	name:Synonym:vitelline envelope formation	name:Synonym:zona pellucida assembly	name:Synonym:ZP assembly	info:Definition:Construction of an egg coat, a specialized extracellular matrix that surrounds the ovum of animals. The egg coat provides structural support and can play an essential role in oogenesis, fertilization and early development.
0080166	name:Name:stomium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stomium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A stomium is a fissure or pore in the anther lobe through which the pollen is released.
0090376	name:Name:seed trichome differentiation	name:Synonym:cotton fiber development	name:Synonym:seed hair differentiation	name:Synonym:seed trichome development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized epidermal cell acquires the specialized features of a seed trichome. A seed trichome is a trichome that develops from seed coat epidermis and is often long with putative dispersal function.
0090377	name:Name:seed trichome initiation	name:Synonym:seed trichome fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of an epidermal cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a seed trichome, causing a change in the orientation of cell division in the ovule epidermis at or just before anthesis.
0090379	name:Name:secondary cell wall biogenesis involved in seed trichome differentiation	name:Synonym:secondary cell wall biosynthesis involved in seed trichome differentiation	name:Synonym:seed trichome secondary wall biosynthesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of inextensible cellulose- and pectin-containing cell walls that are formed between the plasma membrane and primary cell wall of seed trichomes after cell expansion is complete.
0090380	name:Name:seed trichome maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a seed trichome to attain its fully functional state.
0022413	name:Name:reproductive process in single-celled organism	info:Definition:A process, occurring at the cellular level, that is involved in the reproductive function of a single-celled organism.
0000755	name:Name:cytogamy	name:Synonym:zygote formation	info:Definition:During conjugation with cellular fusion, the process resulting in creating a single cell from complementary mating types. The localized remodeling and dissolution of external protective structures allow the fusion of the plasma membranes and cytoplasmic mixing. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0030437	name:Name:ascospore formation	name:Synonym:ascospore biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spore formation	name:Synonym:sporulation	info:Definition:The process in which cells that are products of meiosis acquire the specialized features of ascospores. Ascospores are generally found in clusters of four or eight spores within a single mother cell, the ascus, and are characteristic of the ascomycete fungi (phylum Ascomycota).
0034304	name:Name:actinomycete-type spore formation	info:Definition:The process in which differentiated, resting cells are formed from a substrate mycelium; characteristic of many members of the order Actinomycetales.
0030476	name:Name:ascospore wall assembly	name:Synonym:spore wall assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form an ascospore wall. During sporulation in Ascomycota, each ascospore nucleus becomes surrounded by a specialized spore wall, formed by deposition of spore wall components in the lumenal space between the outer and inner leaflets of the prospore membrane. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0030583	name:Name:fruiting body development in cellular response to starvation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fruiting body over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The process begins when cells respond to a lack of nutrients in the environment and ends when the fruiting body is a mature structure.
0030707	name:Name:ovarian follicle cell development	info:Definition:The process that occurs during oogenesis involving the ovarian follicle cells, somatic cells which surround the germ cells of an ovary. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030713	name:Name:ovarian follicle cell stalk formation	info:Definition:Development of ovarian follicle cells to create the interfollicular stalks that connect the egg chambers of progressive developmental stages. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030717	name:Name:karyosome formation	info:Definition:The chromosome organization process in which meiotic chromosomes in the oocyte nucleus cluster together to form a compact spherical structure called the karyosome.
0030719	name:Name:P granule organization	name:Synonym:P granule organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:polar granule organisation	name:Synonym:polar granule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of polar granules, cytoplasmic, non-membranous RNA/protein complex aggregates in the primordial germ cells of many higher eukaryotes.
0030723	name:Name:ovarian fusome organization	name:Synonym:ovarian fusome organisation	name:Synonym:ovarian fusome organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the fusome of ovarian cells, an organelle derived from the spectrosome. It anchors the mitotic spindle pole to provide orientation during cystoblast cell divisions.
0030724	name:Name:testicular fusome organization	name:Synonym:testicular fusome organisation	name:Synonym:testicular fusome organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the fusome of testicular cells, an organelle derived from the spectrosome.
0030726	name:Name:male germline ring canal formation	name:Synonym:spermatocyte ring canal formation	name:Synonym:testicular ring canal formation	info:Definition:Formation of the intercellular bridges that connect the germ-line cells of a male cyst.
0031149	name:Name:sorocarp stalk cell differentiation	name:Synonym:stalk cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a sorocarp stalk cell, any of the cellulose-covered cells that form the stalk of a sorocarp. An example of this process is found in Dictyostelium discoideum.
0031292	name:Name:gene conversion at mating-type locus, DNA double-strand break processing	info:Definition:The 5' to 3' exonucleolytic resection of the DNA at the site of the break at the mating-type locus to form a 3' single-strand DNA overhang.
0031321	name:Name:ascospore-type prospore formation	name:Synonym:forespore formation	info:Definition:During ascospore formation, the process in which each haploid nucleus becomes encapsulated by a double membrane.
0031382	name:Name:mating projection assembly	name:Synonym:mating projection biogenesis	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a cell projection in response to mating pheromone. This process is observed in unicellular fungi.
0032005	name:Name:regulation of conjugation with cellular fusion by signal transduction	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals that bring about the relay, amplification or dampening of a signal generated in response to a cue, such as starvation or pheromone exposure, in organisms that undergo conjugation with cellular fusion.
0000750	name:Name:pheromone-dependent signal transduction involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:transduction of mating signal	info:Definition:A signal transduction process resulting in the relay, amplification or dampening of a signal generated in response to pheromone exposure in organisms that undergo conjugation with cellular fusion. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0071507	name:Name:MAPKKK cascade involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:conjugation with cellular fusion, MAPKKK cascade	name:Synonym:MAPKKK cascade involved in mating response	info:Definition:A MAPKKK cascade culminating in the phosphorylation and activation of a MAP kinase that occurs in the context of conjugation with cellular fusion.
0032219	name:Name:cell wall macromolecule catabolic process involved in cytogamy	name:Synonym:cell wall macromolecule catabolic process during cytogamy	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of macromolecules forming part of a cell wall that contribute to cytogamy.
0032220	name:Name:plasma membrane fusion involved in cytogamy	name:Synonym:plasma membrane fusion during cytogamy	info:Definition:The joining of two or more lipid bilayer membranes that surround cells, that contributes to cytogamy.
0033327	name:Name:Leydig cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a Leydig cell. A Leydig cell is a testosterone-secreting cell in the interstitial area, between the seminiferous tubules, in the testis.
0034217	name:Name:ascospore wall chitin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall chitin anabolism	name:Synonym:ascospore wall chitin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ascospore wall chitin formation	name:Synonym:ascospore wall chitin synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of ascospore wall chitin, a linear polysaccharide consisting of P-1,4-linked N-acetyl-D-glucosamine residues, found in the walls of ascospores.
0034294	name:Name:sexual spore wall assembly	name:Synonym:sexual spore wall formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a sexual spore wall, the specialized envelope lying outside the cell membrane of a spore derived from a product of meiosis.
0034408	name:Name:ascospore wall beta-glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-glucan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving beta-glucans, compounds composed of glucose residues linked by beta-D-glucosidic bonds, found in the walls of ascospores.
0034409	name:Name:ascospore wall 1,3-beta-D-glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall 1,3-beta-glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall 1,3-beta-glucan metabolism	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-1,3 glucan metabolic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-1,3 glucan metabolism	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving beta-1,3 glucans, compounds composed of glucose residues linked by 1,3-beta-D-glucosidic bonds, found in the walls of ascospores.
0034412	name:Name:ascospore wall beta-glucan biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-glucan anabolism	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-glucan biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-glucan formation	name:Synonym:ascospore wall beta-glucan synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of beta-glucans, compounds composed of glucose residues linked by beta-D-glucosidic bonds, found in the walls of ascospores.
0034624	name:Name:DNA recombinase assembly involved in gene conversion at mating-type locus	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of strand exchange proteins (recombinases) into higher order oligomers on single-stranded DNA, involved in the conversion of the mating-type locus from one allele to another.
0034636	name:Name:strand invasion involved in gene conversion at mating-type locus	info:Definition:The process in which the nucleoprotein complex (composed of the broken single-strand DNA and the recombinase) searches and identifies a region of homology in intact duplex DNA at the mating-type locus. The broken single-strand DNA displaces the like strand and forms Watson-Crick base pairs with its complement, forming a duplex in which each strand is from one of the two recombining DNA molecules. This process occurs as part of gene conversion at the mating-type locus.
0035037	name:Name:sperm entry	info:Definition:An endocytosis process that results in penetration of the egg shell through the micropyle (a specialized anterior opening in the vitelline envelope) and entry of the entire sperm, including the surrounding plasma membrane and the sperm tail, into the egg cytoplasm. This step in fertilization is seen in Drosophila, where a plasma membrane fusion event between the sperm and the egg does not occur.
0035038	name:Name:female pronucleus assembly	name:Synonym:female pronucleus assembly	info:Definition:Assembly of the haploid nucleus of the unfertilized egg.
0035039	name:Name:male pronucleus assembly	name:Synonym:male pronucleus formation	info:Definition:The conversion at fertilization of the inactive sperm nucleus into a male pronucleus with its chromosomes processed for the first zygotic division.
0035040	name:Name:sperm nuclear envelope removal	info:Definition:Removal of the sperm nuclear envelope, allowing entry of maternal factors into the sperm nucleus.
0035041	name:Name:sperm chromatin decondensation	info:Definition:Unwinding of the condensed nuclear chromatin of an inactive sperm nucleus.
0035042	name:Name:fertilization, exchange of chromosomal proteins	name:Synonym:sperm-specific histone exchange	name:Synonym:sperm-specific histone replacement	info:Definition:Replacement of sperm-specific chromosomal proteins with somatic histones, to allow the paternal genome to acquire a nucleosomal chromatin organization compatible with nuclear activity.
0035047	name:Name:centrosomal and pronuclear rotation	info:Definition:The rotation of centrosomes and associated pronuclei in one-cell embryos such as those of Caenorhabditis elegans, occurring as a transition between pronuclear migration and pronuclear fusion.
0035092	name:Name:sperm chromatin condensation	info:Definition:The progressive compaction of the spermatid chromatin so that it reaches a level of condensation that is not compatible with nuclear activities such as transcription or DNA replication.
0035093	name:Name:spermatogenesis, exchange of chromosomal proteins	name:Synonym:somatic histone exchange	name:Synonym:somatic histone replacement	info:Definition:The replacement of somatic histones within sperm chromatin with sperm-specific histones or protamines with unique DNA-binding properties, resulting in condensation of the sperm chromatin.
0035232	name:Name:germ cell attraction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a germ cell from their site of production to the gonad, through the attraction of cells towards their target.
0035233	name:Name:germ cell repulsion	info:Definition:The directed movement of a germ cell from their site of production to the gonad, through the repulsion of cells away from a tissue.
0035234	name:Name:germ cell programmed cell death	name:Synonym:programmed cell death of germ cells	name:Synonym:programmed cell death, germ cells	info:Definition:Programmed cell death of an errant germ line cell that is outside the normal migratory path or ectopic to the gonad. This is an important mechanism of regulating germ cell survival within the embryo.
0035471	name:Name:luteinizing hormone signaling pathway involved in ovarian follicle development	name:Synonym:luteinizing hormone signalling pathway involved in ovarian follicle development	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals initiated by luteinizing hormone binding to a receptor, where the activated receptor signals via downstream effectors that contribute to progression of the ovarian follicle over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0042070	name:Name:maintenance of oocyte nucleus location involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte nucleus localization during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte nucleus location involved in oocyte dorsal-ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte nucleus location involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis determination	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte nucleus location involved in oocyte dorsoventral axis specification	name:Synonym:maintenance of oocyte nucleus position during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, maintenance of oocyte nucleus localization	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, maintenance of oocyte nucleus position	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, oocyte nucleus anchoring	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus anchoring during oocyte axis determination	info:Definition:Maintenance of the oocyte nucleus in a particular position within the cell during the establishment and maintenance of the axes of the oocyte. An example of this process is found In Drosophila melanogaster.
0042078	name:Name:germ-line stem cell division	name:Synonym:germ-line stem cell renewal	info:Definition:The self-renewing division of a germline stem cell to produce a daughter stem cell and a daughter germ cell, which will divide to form the gametes.
0048132	name:Name:female germ-line stem cell division	name:Synonym:female germ-line stem cell renewal	info:Definition:The self-renewing division of a germline stem cell in the female gonad, to produce a daughter stem cell and a daughter germ cell, which will divide to form the female gametes.
0048133	name:Name:male germ-line stem cell division	name:Synonym:male germ-line stem cell renewal	info:Definition:The self-renewing division of a germline stem cell in the male gonad, to produce a daughter stem cell and a daughter germ cell, which will divide to form the male gametes.
0042243	name:Name:asexual spore wall assembly	name:Synonym:asexual spore wall formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form an asexual spore wall, the specialized envelope lying outside the cell membrane of a spore derived from a product of mitosis. Examples of this process are found in Bacterial species.
0042699	name:Name:follicle-stimulating hormone signaling pathway	name:Synonym:follicle stimulating hormone signaling pathway	name:Synonym:follicle stimulating hormone signalling pathway	name:Synonym:follicle-stimulating hormone signalling pathway	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals mediated by follicle-stimulating hormone.
0042701	name:Name:progesterone secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of progesterone, a steroid hormone, by the corpus luteum of the ovary and by the placenta.
0043046	name:Name:DNA methylation involved in gamete generation	name:Synonym:de novo DNA methylation	info:Definition:The covalent transfer of a methyl group to C-5 of cytosine that contributes to the establishment of DNA methylation patterns in the gamete.
0045450	name:Name:bicoid mRNA localization	name:Synonym:bicoid mRNA localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of bicoid mRNA localization	info:Definition:Any process in which bicoid mRNA is transported to and maintained within the oocyte as part of the specification of the anterior/posterior axis.
0045476	name:Name:nurse cell apoptosis	name:Synonym:apoptosis of nurse cells	name:Synonym:nurse cell programmed cell death by apoptosis	name:Synonym:programmed cell death of nurse cells by apoptosis	info:Definition:The process in which nurse cells undergo apoptosis. During late oogenesis, following the transfer of substances from the nurse cells to the oocyte, nurse cell remnants are cleared from the egg chamber by apoptosis.
0046787	name:Name:viral DNA repair	info:Definition:The process of restoring viral DNA after damage or errors in replication.
0048137	name:Name:spermatocyte division	name:Synonym:spermatocyte cell division	info:Definition:The meiotic divisions undergone by the primary and secondary spermatocytes to produce a cyst of haploid spermatids.
0048235	name:Name:pollen sperm cell differentiation	name:Synonym:male gamete generation	name:Synonym:male gametophyte sperm cell differentiation	name:Synonym:sperm cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a haploid sperm cell within the plant gametophyte.
0048240	name:Name:sperm capacitation	info:Definition:A process required for sperm to reach fertilization competence. Sperm undergo an incompletely understood series of morphological and molecular maturational processes, termed capacitation, involving, among other processes, protein tyrosine phosphorylation and increased intracellular calcium.
0048515	name:Name:spermatid differentiation	name:Synonym:spermatid cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a spermatid over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0048600	name:Name:oocyte fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into an oocyte.
0048601	name:Name:oocyte morphogenesis	name:Synonym:oocyte morphogenesis during differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which the structures of an oocyte are generated and organized. This process occurs while the initially relatively unspecialized cell is acquiring the specialized features of an oocyte.
0048657	name:Name:tapetal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a tapetal cell. The tapetum is a layer of cells that provides a source of nutrition for the pollen grains as they mature.
0051663	name:Name:oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of oocyte nucleus localization during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, oocyte nucleus localization	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus localisation involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus localization during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal-ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsoventral axis specification	info:Definition:The directed movement of the nucleus to a specific location within a cell during the establishment and maintenance of the dorsal/ventral axis of the oocyte.
0055047	name:Name:generative cell mitosis	info:Definition:The process in which the generative cell divides by mitosis to form two haploid cells. These will subsequently differentiate into sperm cells.
0060008	name:Name:Sertoli cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a Sertoli cell. A Sertoli cell is a supporting cell projecting inward from the basement membrane of seminiferous tubules.
0060009	name:Name:Sertoli cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a Sertoli cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a Sertoli cell fate.
0060010	name:Name:Sertoli cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the cellular identity of Sertoli cells is acquired and determined.
0060470	name:Name:elevation of cytosolic calcium ion concentration involved in egg activation	info:Definition:The process that increases the concentration of calcium ions in the cytosol after fertilization or the physiological activation of an egg.
0060472	name:Name:positive regulation of cortical granule exocytosis by elevation of cytosolic calcium ion concentration	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cortical granule exocytosis by directing movement of calcium ions (Ca2+) into the cytosol.
0060471	name:Name:cortical granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:cortical granule release	info:Definition:The process of secretion by a cell that results in the release of intracellular molecules contained within a cortical granule by fusion of the vesicle with the plasma membrane of a cell. A cortical granule is a specialized secretory vesicle that is released during egg activation that changes the surface of the egg to prevent polyspermy.
0060477	name:Name:peptidyl-serine phosphorylation involved in acrosome reaction	info:Definition:The phosphorylation of peptidyl-serine to form peptidyl-O-phospho-L-serine that is part of the acrosome reaction.
0060478	name:Name:acrosomal vesicle exocytosis	name:Synonym:acrosomal granule exocytosis	name:Synonym:acrosome exocytosis	info:Definition:The release of intracellular molecules contained within the acrosomal granule by fusion of the vesicle with the plasma membrane of the oocyte, requiring calcium ions.
0060518	name:Name:cell migration involved in prostatic bud elongation	info:Definition:The orderly movement of epithelial cells from one site to another contributing to the elongation of the primary prostatic bud.
0060530	name:Name:smooth muscle cell differentiation involved in prostate glandular acinus development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a smooth muscle cell of the prostate glandular acinus.
0060531	name:Name:neuroendocrine cell differentiation involved in prostate gland acinus development	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquires specialized structural and functions of a neuroendocrine cell of the prostate gland acinus.
0060738	name:Name:epithelial-mesenchymal signaling involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:epithelial-mesenchymal signalling involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:Any process that results in the transfer of information from an epithelial cell to a mesenchymal cell where it is interpreted and contributes to the progression of the prostate gland over time.
0060739	name:Name:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signaling involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signalling involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:Any process that mediates the transfer of information from a mesenchymal cell to an epithelial cell where it is received and interpreted contributing to the progression of the prostate gland over time.
0060521	name:Name:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signaling involved in prostate induction	name:Synonym:mesenchymal-epithelial cell signalling involved in prostate induction	info:Definition:Signaling at short range from urogenital sinus mesenchymal cells to cells of the urogenital epithelium resulting in the epithelial cells adopting a prostatic fate.
0060742	name:Name:epithelial cell differentiation involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of an epithelial cell of the prostate gland.
0060528	name:Name:secretory columnal luminar epithelial cell differentiation involved in prostate glandular acinus development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized epithelial cell acquires specialized features of a secretory columnal luminar epithelial cell of the prostate.
0060529	name:Name:squamous basal epithelial stem cell differentiation involved in prostate gland acinus development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized epithelial cell acquires specialized features of a squamous basal epithelial stem cell of the prostate.
0060743	name:Name:epithelial cell maturation involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:prostate gland epithelial cell development	info:Definition:The developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an epithelial cell of the prostate gland to attain its fully functional state. An epithelial cell is a cell usually found in a two-dimensional sheet with a free surface.
0060783	name:Name:mesenchymal smoothened signaling pathway involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:mesenchymal hedgehog signaling pathway involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:mesenchymal hh signaling pathway involved in prostate gland development	name:Synonym:mesenchymal smoothened signalling pathway involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of activation of the transmembrane Smoothened-type protein in the mesenchymal cells of the prostate that contribute to the progression of the prostate over time. This process contributes to lung development.
0060833	name:Name:Wnt receptor signaling pathway involved in animal/vegetal axis specification	name:Synonym:Wnt receptor signalling pathway involved in animal/vegetal axis specification	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals initiated by binding of Wnt protein to a frizzled family receptor on the surface of the target cell contributing to the specification of the animal/vegetal axis of an oocyte.
0060869	name:Name:transmembrane receptor protein serine/threonine kinase signaling pathway involved in floral organ abscission	name:Synonym:transmembrane receptor protein serine/threonine kinase signalling pathway involved in floral organ abscission	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of a transmembrane receptor serine/threonine kinase binding to its physiological ligand that contributes to the process of floral organ abscission.
0060870	name:Name:cell wall disassembly involved in floral organ abscission	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the breakdown of the cell wall that contributes to the process of floral organ abscission.
0061364	name:Name:apoptosis involved in luteolysis	name:Synonym:structural luteolysis	info:Definition:The process of apoptosis that contributes to luteolysis.
0070591	name:Name:ascospore wall biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of an ascospore wall.
0070789	name:Name:metula development	name:Synonym:development of primary sterigmata	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of metulae over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Metulae are elongated mononucleate cells that bud from the surface of the conidiophore tip.
0070790	name:Name:phialide development	name:Synonym:development of secondary sterigmata	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of phialides over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Phialides are specialized cells that bud from the ends of metulae on the conidiophore tip. Chains of conidia, or asexual spores, develop from the phialide tips.
0070792	name:Name:Hulle cell development	name:Synonym:Huelle cell development	name:Synonym:Hulle cell formation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of Hulle cells over time, from their formation to the mature structures. Hulle cells are specialized multinucleate cells that originate from a nest-like aggregation of hyphae during sexual development and serve as nurse cells to the developing cleistothecium, or fruiting body.
0070871	name:Name:cell wall organization involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:A process of cell wall organization that contributes to conjugation with cellular fusion.
0071508	name:Name:activation of MAPK activity involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:activation of MAPK activity involved in mating response	name:Synonym:conjugation with cellular fusion, activation of MAPK activity	info:Definition:Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme MAP kinase in the context of conjugation with cellular fusion.
0071509	name:Name:activation of MAPKK activity involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:activation of MAP kinase kinase activity during conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:activation of MAPKK activity involved in mating response	name:Synonym:conjugation with cellular fusion, activation of MAP kinase kinase activity	name:Synonym:conjugation with cellular fusion, activation of MAPKK activity	info:Definition:Any process that initiates the activity of the inactive enzyme MAP kinase kinase in the context of conjugation with cellular fusion.
0071631	name:Name:mating pheromone secretion involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	name:Synonym:mating-type pheromone secretion involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:The regulated release of a mating pheromone, a peptide hormone that induces a behavioral or physiological response(s) from a responding organism or cell, that contributes to a conjugation process that results in the union of cellular and genetic information from compatible mating types.
0071833	name:Name:peptide pheromone export involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:The directed movement of a peptide pheromone out of a cell by a secretion or export pathway used solely for the export of peptide pheromones that contributes to a conjugation process that results in the union of cellular and genetic information from compatible mating types.
0048869	name:Name:cellular developmental process	info:Definition:A biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a cell over time from an initial condition to a later condition.
0001708	name:Name:cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of cell identity. Once specification has taken place, a cell will be committed to differentiate down a specific pathway if left in its normal environment.
0001714	name:Name:endodermal cell fate specification	name:Synonym:endoderm cell fate specification	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process that results in a cell becoming capable of differentiating autonomously into an endoderm cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0001715	name:Name:ectodermal cell fate specification	name:Synonym:ectoderm cell fate specification	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process that results in a cell becoming becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an ectoderm cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0007501	name:Name:mesodermal cell fate specification	name:Synonym:mesoderm cell fate specification	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a mesoderm cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0009957	name:Name:epidermal cell fate specification	name:Synonym:hypodermal cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an epidermal cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0010057	name:Name:trichoblast fate specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of a trichoblast.
0010158	name:Name:abaxial cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an abaxial cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0014018	name:Name:neuroblast fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neuroblast in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway. Upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0014036	name:Name:neural crest cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neural crest cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0021780	name:Name:glial cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a glial cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway. Upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0035153	name:Name:epithelial cell type specification, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:tracheal cell type specification	name:Synonym:tracheal epithelial cell type specification	info:Definition:Allocation of epithelial cells within each migrating branch in an open tracheal system to distinct tracheal cell fates. During the migration phase each branch forms a well-defined number of cell types (including fusion cells, terminal cells and branch cells) at precise positions.
0035310	name:Name:notum cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell in the larval wing imaginal disc becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a notum cell, if left in its normal environment.
0035311	name:Name:wing cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell in the larval wing imaginal disc becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a wing cell, if left in its normal environment.
0035857	name:Name:eosinophil fate specification	name:Synonym:eosinophil cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of identity of an eosinophil cell. Once specification has taken place, a cell will be committed to differentiate down a specific pathway if left in its normal environment.
0042679	name:Name:compound eye cone cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a compound eye cone cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0042694	name:Name:muscle cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a muscle cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0048626	name:Name:myoblast cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a myoblast cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway. Upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0048665	name:Name:neuron fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neuron in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway. Upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0048866	name:Name:stem cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a stem cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway. Upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed.
0060573	name:Name:cell fate specification involved in pattern specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of the identity of a cell in a field of cells that is being instructed as to how to differentiate. Once specification has taken place, that cell will be committed to differentiate down a specific pathway if left in its normal environment.
0060847	name:Name:endothelial cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of identity of an endothelial cell. Once specification has taken place, a cell will be committed to differentiate down a specific pathway if left in its normal environment.
0060912	name:Name:cardiac cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process involved in the specification of cardiac cell identity. Once specification has taken place, a cell will be committed to differentiate down a specific pathway if left in its normal environment.
0072327	name:Name:vulval cell fate specification	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a nematode vulval cell in an environment that is neutral with respect to the developmental pathway; upon specification, the cell fate can be reversed. In nematodes, the vulva is formed from ventral epidermal cells during larval stages to give rise to a fully formed adult vulva, which is the egg-laying organ of female and hermaphrodite nematodes.
0001709	name:Name:cell fate determination	info:Definition:A process involved in cell fate commitment. Once determination has taken place, a cell becomes committed to differentiate down a particular pathway regardless of its environment.
0001713	name:Name:ectodermal cell fate determination	name:Synonym:ectoderm cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process that results in a cell becoming capable of differentiating autonomously into an ectoderm cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007400	name:Name:neuroblast fate determination	name:Synonym:neuroblast cell fate determination	name:Synonym:neuroblast identity determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neuroblast cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0007402	name:Name:ganglion mother cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a ganglion mother cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007403	name:Name:glial cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a glial cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007425	name:Name:epithelial cell fate determination, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:tracheal cell fate determination	name:Synonym:tracheal epithelial cell fate determination	name:Synonym:tracheal placode cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an epithelial cell within an open tracheal system regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed. Tracheal cells are set aside as 10 clusters of approximately 80 cells on each side of the embryo (termed tracheal placodes). An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007493	name:Name:endodermal cell fate determination	name:Synonym:endoderm cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an endoderm cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007500	name:Name:mesodermal cell fate determination	name:Synonym:mesoderm cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a mesoderm cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0007518	name:Name:myoblast cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a myoblast cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0007521	name:Name:muscle cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a muscle cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0014035	name:Name:neural crest cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neural crest cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0016360	name:Name:sensory organ precursor cell fate determination	name:Synonym:sense organ precursor cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a sensory organ precursor cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0030716	name:Name:oocyte fate determination	name:Synonym:oocyte cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an oocyte cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0035028	name:Name:leading edge cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a leading edge cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0035858	name:Name:eosinophil fate determination	name:Synonym:eosinophil cell fate determination	info:Definition:The cell fate determination process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into an eosinophil cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0042680	name:Name:compound eye cone cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a compound eye cone cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0046845	name:Name:branched duct epithelial cell fate determination, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:branch cell fate determination	info:Definition:Allocation of a set number of cells to each primary branch in an open tracheal system, prior to the onset of cell migration. This establishes different domains of cells within the tracheal placode.
0048664	name:Name:neuron fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a neuron regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0048867	name:Name:stem cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a stem cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed.
0060582	name:Name:cell fate determination involved in pattern specification	info:Definition:A process involved in commitment of a cell to a fate in a developmental field. Once determination has taken place, a cell becomes committed to differentiate down a particular pathway regardless of its environment.
0060848	name:Name:endothelial cell fate determination	info:Definition:A process involved in cell fate commitment of an endothelial cell. Once determination has taken place, a cell becomes committed to differentiate down a particular pathway regardless of its environment.
0060913	name:Name:cardiac cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process involved in cardiac cell fate commitment. Once determination has taken place, a cell becomes committed to differentiate down a particular pathway regardless of its environment.
0072326	name:Name:vulval cell fate determination	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes capable of differentiating autonomously into a nematode vulval cell regardless of its environment; upon determination, the cell fate cannot be reversed. In nematodes, the vulva is formed from ventral epidermal cells during larval stages to give rise to a fully formed adult vulva, which is the egg-laying organ of female and hermaphrodite nematodes.
0010440	name:Name:stomatal lineage progression	info:Definition:The process in which an unspecialized epidermal cell progresses through a series of divisions that culminate in the production of a stomatal complex.
0021806	name:Name:initiation of movement involved in cerebral cortex radial glia guided migration	name:Synonym:initiation of movement involved in cerebral cortex glial-mediated radial migration	info:Definition:The initial stages of cell motility involved in the glial-mediated movement of cells in the developing cerebral cortex.
0030154	name:Name:cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells, e.g. embryonic or regenerative cells, acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize the cells, tissues, or organs of the mature organism or some other relatively stable phase of the organism's life history. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate and its subsequent development to the mature state.
0001570	name:Name:vasculogenesis	name:Synonym:vascular morphogenesis	info:Definition:The differentiation of endothelial cells from progenitor cells during blood vessel development, and the de novo formation of blood vessels and tubes.
0001649	name:Name:osteoblast differentiation	name:Synonym:osteoblast cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of an osteoblast, the mesodermal cell that gives rise to bone.
0001742	name:Name:oenocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:oenocyte cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of an oenocyte. Oenocytes are large secretory cells found in clusters underlying the epidermis of larval abdominal segments.
0001826	name:Name:inner cell mass cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of an inner cell mass cell.
0001829	name:Name:trophectodermal cell differentiation	name:Synonym:trophectoderm cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a trophectoderm cell.
0002062	name:Name:chondrocyte differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a chondroblast acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a chondrocyte. A chondrocyte is a polymorphic cell that forms cartilage.
0002244	name:Name:hemopoietic progenitor cell differentiation	name:Synonym:haematopoietic progenitor cell differentiation	name:Synonym:haemopoietic progenitor cell differentiation	name:Synonym:hematopoietic progenitor cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which precursor cell type acquires the specialized features of a hemopoietic progenitor cell, a class of cell types including myeloid progenitor cells and lymphoid progenitor cells.
0002521	name:Name:leukocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:immune cell differentiation	name:Synonym:leucocyte differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized hemopoietic precursor cell acquires the specialized features of a leukocyte. A leukocyte is an achromatic cell of the myeloid or lymphoid lineages capable of ameboid movement, found in blood or other tissue.
0003309	name:Name:type B pancreatic cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pancreatic B cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pancreatic beta cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features of a type B pancreatic cell. A type B pancreatic cell is a cell located towards center of the islets of Langerhans that secretes insulin.
0003310	name:Name:pancreatic A cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pancreatic alpha cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and functional features of a pancreatic A cell. A pancreatic A cell is a cell in the pancreas that secretes glucagon.
0003311	name:Name:pancreatic D cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pancreatic delta cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and functional features that characterize a pancreatic delta cell. A delta cell is a cell of the pancreas that produces somatostatin.
0003312	name:Name:pancreatic PP cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pancreatic polypeptide-producing cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and functional features of a pancreatic polypeptide-producing cell. A pancreatic polypeptide-producing cell is a cell in the pancreas that produces pancreatic polypeptide.
0007514	name:Name:garland cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a garland cell, a small group of nephrocytes which take up waste materials from the hemolymph by endocytosis.
0008583	name:Name:mystery cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an undifferentiated cell acquires the features of a mystery cell. The mystery cells are a precluster of cells that emerge from the compound eye morphogenetic furrow, normally positioned between R3 and R4. They then disappear into the surrounding pool of undifferentiated cells and have no known fate in the mature ommatidium. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0009557	name:Name:antipodal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an uncellularized nucleus cellularizes and acquires the specialized features of an antipodal cell.
0009559	name:Name:embryo sac central cell differentiation	name:Synonym:embryo sac endosperm mother cell differentiation	name:Synonym:female gametophyte central cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which the two uncellularized polar nuclei cellularize, fuse and acquire the specialized features of a mononucleate diploid central cell.
0009563	name:Name:synergid differentiation	name:Synonym:synergid cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which an uncellularized nucleus cellularizes and acquires the specialized features of a synergid cell.
0009913	name:Name:epidermal cell differentiation	name:Synonym:hypodermal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of an epidermal cell, any of the cells making up the epidermis.
0010001	name:Name:glial cell differentiation	name:Synonym:glia cell differentiation	name:Synonym:neuroglia differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a glial cell.
0010444	name:Name:guard mother cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a meristemoid acquires the specialized features of a guard mother cell.
0010668	name:Name:ectodermal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features of an ectodermal cell. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate.
0014001	name:Name:sclerenchyma cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a sclerenchyma cell. A sclerenchyma cell is a plant cell with thick lignified walls, normally dead at maturity and specialized for structural strength. Includes fiber cells, that are greatly elongated; and sclereids, that are more isodiametric. Intermediate types exist. Cells may or may not be devoid of protoplasm at maturity. Cell form and size are variable.
0014016	name:Name:neuroblast differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a neuroblast. There are at least four stages through which the pluripotent cells of epiblast or blastula become neuroblasts.
0021515	name:Name:cell differentiation in spinal cord	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize the cells of the spinal cord. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate.
0021533	name:Name:cell differentiation in hindbrain	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize the mature cells of the hindbrain. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate.
0021889	name:Name:olfactory bulb interneuron differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a neuroblast acquires specialized features of an interneuron residing in the olfactory bulb.
0021979	name:Name:hypothalamus cell differentiation	info:Definition:The differentiation of cells that will contribute to the structure and function of the hypothalamus.
0022008	name:Name:neurogenesis	name:Synonym:nervous system cell generation	name:Synonym:neural cell differentiation	info:Definition:Generation of cells within the nervous system.
0022036	name:Name:rhombomere cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a rhombomere cell.
0022619	name:Name:generative cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a generative cell. The generative cell gives rise to the sperm cells in the male gametophyte.
0022620	name:Name:vegetative cell differentiation	name:Synonym:tube cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a vegetative cell. The vegetative cell is gives rise to the pollen tube.
0030099	name:Name:myeloid cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized myeloid precursor cell acquires the specialized features of any cell of the myeloid leukocyte, megakaryocyte, thrombocyte, or erythrocyte lineages.
0030182	name:Name:neuron differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a neuron.
0030435	name:Name:sporulation resulting in formation of a cellular spore	name:Synonym:cellular spore formation by sporulation	name:Synonym:spore biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spore differentiation	name:Synonym:spore formation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a cellular spore, a cell form that can be used for dissemination, for survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for reproduction.
0030855	name:Name:epithelial cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of an epithelial cell, any of the cells making up an epithelium.
0035051	name:Name:cardiac cell differentiation	name:Synonym:heart cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized structural and/or functional features of a cell that will form part of the cardiac organ of an individual.
0035779	name:Name:angioblast cell differentiation	name:Synonym:angioblastic mesenchymal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized structural and/or functional features of an angioblast cell. Angioblasts are one of the two products formed from hemangioblast cells (the other being pluripotent hemopoietic stem cells).
0035883	name:Name:enteroendocrine cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of an enteroendocrine cell. Enteroendocrine cells are hormonally active epithelial cells in the gut that constitute the diffuse neuroendocrine system.
0042675	name:Name:compound eye cone cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a compound eye cone cell, a cone-shaped cell, that focuses light in a compound eye.
0042692	name:Name:muscle cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a muscle cell.
0043158	name:Name:heterocyst differentiation	name:Synonym:heterocyst biosynthesis	name:Synonym:heterocyst cell differentiation	name:Synonym:heterocyst formation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a heterocyst, a differentiated cell in certain cyanobacteria whose purpose is to fix nitrogen.
0045444	name:Name:fat cell differentiation	name:Synonym:adipocyte cell differentiation	name:Synonym:adipocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:adipogenesis	name:Synonym:adipose cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of an adipocyte, an animal connective tissue cell specialized for the synthesis and storage of fat.
0048333	name:Name:mesodermal cell differentiation	name:Synonym:mesoderm cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a mesoderm cell.
0048533	name:Name:sporocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:sporocyte development	name:Synonym:sporocyte morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized floral cell acquires the specialized features of a sporocyte. Sporocytes are the haploid spores of angiosperms. Once formed, they undergo meiotic divisions to form microspores and megaspores.
0048756	name:Name:sieve cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a sieve cell. A sieve cell is a type of sieve element that has relatively undifferentiated sieve areas (with narrow pores). The sieve areas are rather uniform in structure on all walls; that is, there are no sieve plates. Typical of gymnosperms and lower vascular plants. The sieve element is the cell in the phloem tissue concerned with mainly longitudinal conduction of food materials.
0048759	name:Name:vessel member cell differentiation	name:Synonym:vessel element cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a vessel member cell. A vessel member cell is one of the components of a vessel in the xylem. It is a dead cell with the wall between adjacent members being variously perforated and the walls that persist variously thickened.
0048760	name:Name:parenchymal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a parenchymal cell. Parenchymal cells are the most abundant and versatile cells in plants. They have very few distinguishing characteristics and botanists classify them as any cell type that cannot be assigned to any other structural or functional class. They can redifferentiate and dedifferentiate and are involved in storage, basic metabolism and other processes. The cells are polyhedral, typically with thin, non-lignified cellulose cell walls and nucleate living protoplasm. They vary in size, form, and wall structure.
0048761	name:Name:collenchyma cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a collenchyma cell. This is a plant cell in which the primary cell walls are unevenly thickened, with most thickening occurring at the cell corners. Cells are living and able to grow, they are elongated, and lignin and secondary walls absent. Collenchyma cells make up collenchyma tissue which acts as a supporting tissue in growing shoots, leaves and petioles. This tissue is often arranged in cortical ribs, as seen prominently in celery and rhubarb petioles.
0048762	name:Name:mesenchymal cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a mesenchymal cell. A mesenchymal cell is a loosely associated cell that is part of the connective tissue in an organism. Mesenchymal cells give rise to more mature connective tissue cell types.
0048824	name:Name:pigment cell precursor differentiation	name:Synonym:chromatophore precursor differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a pigment cell precursor.
0048863	name:Name:stem cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a stem cell. A stem cell is a cell that retains the ability to divide and proliferate throughout life to provide progenitor cells that can differentiate into specialized cells.
0048888	name:Name:neuromast mantle cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a neuromast mantle cell. Mantle cells are non-sensory cells that surround the sensory strip, separating the neuromast from the epidermis. Mantle cells secrete the cupula in which the ciliary bundles of all of the hair cells are embedded.
0048889	name:Name:neuromast support cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a neuromast support cell. Support cells are non-sensory cells of the neuromast that extend between the sensory hair cells from the basement membrane to the apical surface; they are surrounded by mantle cells.
0050931	name:Name:pigment cell differentiation	name:Synonym:chromatophore differentiation	name:Synonym:pigmented cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a pigmented cell, such as a melanocyte.
0060014	name:Name:granulosa cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a granulosa cell, a supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of mammals.
0060019	name:Name:radial glial cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which neuroepithelial cells of the neural tube give rise to radial glial cells, specialized bipotential progenitors cells of the brain. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate.
0060034	name:Name:notochord cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features cells that make up the notochord. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a notochord cell fate.
0060126	name:Name:somatotropin secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:growth hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:somatotrope differentiation	name:Synonym:somatotroph differentiation	name:Synonym:somatotrophin secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:somatotropic cell differentiation	name:Synonym:somatrophic cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a somatotropin secreting cell. A somatotropin secreting cell is an acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces growth hormone, somatotropin.
0060127	name:Name:prolactin secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:epsilon-acidophil differentiation	name:Synonym:lactotrope differentiation	name:Synonym:lactotroph differentiation	name:Synonym:lactotropic cell differentiation	name:Synonym:mammotrope differentiation	name:Synonym:mammotroph differentiation	name:Synonym:mammotrophic cell differentiation	name:Synonym:mammotropic cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a prolactin secreting cell. A prolactin secreting cell is an acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces prolactin.
0060128	name:Name:corticotropin hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotrophic hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotropic hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:corticotrope differentiation	name:Synonym:corticotroph differentiation	name:Synonym:corticotrophin hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:corticotropin hormone secreting cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a corticotropic hormone secreting cell. An corticotropic hormone secreting cell is a basophil cell of the anterior pituitary that produces corticotropin.
0060129	name:Name:thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:beta-basophil differentiation	name:Synonym:thyroid stimulating hormone secreting cell differentiation	name:Synonym:thyrotrope differentiation	name:Synonym:thyrotroph differentiation	name:Synonym:TSH-secreting cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell. A thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell is a basophil cell of the anterior pituitary that produces thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyrotrophin.
0060217	name:Name:hemangioblast cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the characteristics of a mature hemangioblast. Hemangioblasts are the proposed common precursor of blood and endothelial lineages.
0060290	name:Name:transdifferentiation	info:Definition:The conversion of a differentiated cell of one fate into a differentiated cell of another fate without first undergoing cell division or reversion to a more primitive or stem cell-like fate.
0060479	name:Name:lung cell differentiation	name:Synonym:pulmonary cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells, e.g. embryonic or regenerative cells, acquire specialized structural and/or functional features of a mature cell found in the lung. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate.
0060563	name:Name:neuroepithelial cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which epiblast cells acquire specialized features of neuroepithelial cells.
0060591	name:Name:chondroblast differentiation	name:Synonym:chondrocyte progenitor cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a mesenchymal cell, acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a chondroblast. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a chondroblast fate. A chondroblast is a precursor cell to chondrocytes.
0060689	name:Name:cell differentiation involved in salivary gland development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize the cells of the salivary gland.
0060706	name:Name:cell differentiation involved in embryonic placenta development	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of the embryonic placenta.
0060718	name:Name:chorionic trophoblast cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells of the ectoplacental cone acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize chorionic trophoblasts. These cells will migrate towards the spongiotrophoblast layer and give rise to syncytiotrophoblasts of the labyrinthine layer.
0061005	name:Name:cell differentiation involved in kidney development	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and/or functional features that characterize the cells of the kidney as it progresses from its formation to the mature state.
0061101	name:Name:neuroendocrine cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a neuroendocrine cell. A neuroendocrine cell is a cell that receives input form a neuron which controls the secretion of an endocrine substance.
0061318	name:Name:renal filtration cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized structural and/or functional features of a renal filtration cell. Renal filtration cells are specialized cells of the renal system that filter fluids by charge, size or both. Differentiation includes the processes involved in commitment of a cell to a specific fate and its subsequent development to the mature state.
0061382	name:Name:Malpighian tubule tip cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a Malpighian tubule tip cell. A Malpighian tubule tip cell is a mitogenic signaling cell that controls the proliferation of its neighboring cells.
0070306	name:Name:lens fiber cell differentiation	name:Synonym:lens fibre cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a lens fiber cell, any of the elongated, tightly packed cells that make up the bulk of the mature lens in the camera-type eye. The cytoplasm of a lens fiber cell is devoid of most intracellular organelles including the cell nucleus, and contains primarily crystallins, a group of water-soluble proteins expressed in vary large quantities.
0070365	name:Name:hepatocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:liver cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a hepatocyte. A hepatocyte is specialized epithelial cell that is organized into interconnected plates called lobules, and is the main structural component of the liver.
0071895	name:Name:odontoblast differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell of neural crest origin acquires the specialized features of an odontoblast, a cell on the outer surface of the dental pulp whose biological function is the creation of dentine.
0075301	name:Name:cell differentiation involved in spore germination	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires specialized features of a specific cell type occurring during spore germination, the physiological and developmental changes that occur in a spore following release from dormancy up to the earliest signs of growth.
0090077	name:Name:foam cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell acquires the specialized features of a foam cell. A foam cell is a type of cell containing lipids in small vacuoles and typically seen in atherosclerotic lesions, as well as other conditions.
0090104	name:Name:pancreatic E cell differentiation	info:Definition:The process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and functional features of a pancreatic E cell. A pancreatic E cell is a cell in the pancreas that secretes ghrelin.
0032989	name:Name:cellular component morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cellular structure morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which cellular structures, including whole cells or cell parts, are generated and organized.
0000902	name:Name:cell morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cellular morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the size or shape of a cell is generated and organized.
0032990	name:Name:cell part morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a cell part are generated and organized.
0043697	name:Name:cell dedifferentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a specialized cell loses the structural or functional features that characterize it in the mature organism, or some other relatively stable phase of the organism's life history. Under certain conditions, these cells can revert back to the features of the stem cells that were their ancestors.
0045165	name:Name:cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of cells to specific cell fates and their capacity to differentiate into particular kinds of cells. Positional information is established through protein signals that emanate from a localized source within a cell (the initial one-cell zygote) or within a developmental field.
0001827	name:Name:inner cell mass cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The cell fate commitment of precursor cells that will become inner cell mass cells.
0001830	name:Name:trophectodermal cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:trophectoderm cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The cell fate commitment of precursor cells that will become trophectoderm cells.
0002051	name:Name:osteoblast fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of mesenchymal cells to the specific cell fate of an osteoblast. An osteoblast is a bone-forming cell which secretes an extracellular matrix. Hydroxyapatite crystals are then deposited into the matrix to form bone.
0002326	name:Name:B cell lineage commitment	name:Synonym:B lymphocyte lineage commitment	name:Synonym:B-cell lineage commitment	name:Synonym:B-lymphocyte lineage commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a lymphoid progenitor cell becomes committed to become any type of B cell.
0002360	name:Name:T cell lineage commitment	name:Synonym:T lymphocyte lineage commitment	name:Synonym:T-cell lineage commitment	name:Synonym:T-lymphocyte lineage commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a lymphoid progenitor cell becomes committed to becoming any type of T cell.
0002680	name:Name:pro-T cell lineage commitment	name:Synonym:pro-T cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:pro-T lymphocyte fate commitment	name:Synonym:pro-T lymphocyte lineage commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a lymphoid progenitor cell becomes committed to becoming a pro-T cell.
0003326	name:Name:pancreatic A cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of a cell to a pancreatic A cell and its capacity to differentiate into a pancreatic A cell. A pancreatic A cell is a cell in the pancreas that secretes glucagon.
0003327	name:Name:type B pancreatic cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:pancreatic B cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of a cell to a type B pancreatic cell fate and its capacity to differentiate into a type B pancreatic cell. A type B pancreatic cell is a cell located towards center of the islets of Langerhans that secretes insulin.
0003328	name:Name:pancreatic D cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of a cell to a pancreatic D cell fate and its capacity to differentiate into a pancreatic D cell. A delta cell is a cell of the pancreas that produces somatostatin.
0003329	name:Name:pancreatic PP cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of a cell to a pancreatic PP cell fate and its capacity to differentiate into a pancreatic PP cell. A pancreatic polypeptide-producing cell is a cell in the pancreas that produces pancreatic polypeptide.
0007445	name:Name:determination of imaginal disc primordium	info:Definition:Allocation of embryonic cells to the imaginal disc founder populations, groups of cells that are committed to contribute to the formation of an imaginal disc compartment.
0010377	name:Name:guard cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:stomatal cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a stomatal guard cell. Guard cells are located in the leaf epidermis and pairwise surround stomatal pores, which allow CO2 influx for photosynthetic carbon fixation and water loss via transpiration to the atmosphere.
0014017	name:Name:neuroblast fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will differentiate into a neuroblast.
0014030	name:Name:mesenchymal cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes committed to become a mesenchymal cell.
0014034	name:Name:neural crest cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a cell becomes committed to become a neural crest cell.
0021781	name:Name:glial cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a glial cell.
0021887	name:Name:hypothalamus gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neuron fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a hypothalamus neuron that releases gonadotrophin-releasing hormone.
0035854	name:Name:eosinophil fate commitment	name:Synonym:eosinophil cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a eosinophil cell. A eosinophil is any of the immature or mature forms of a granular leukocyte with a nucleus that usually has two lobes connected by one or more slender threads of chromatin, and cytoplasm containing coarse, round granules that are uniform in size and which can be stained by the dye eosin.
0042676	name:Name:compound eye cone cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the cone cells of the compound eye, the lens-secreting cells in the ommatidia, adopt pathways of differentiation that lead to the establishment of their distinct cell type.
0042693	name:Name:muscle cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the cellular identity of muscle cells is acquired and determined.
0048625	name:Name:myoblast cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a myoblast cell. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0048663	name:Name:neuron fate commitment	name:Synonym:neuron lineage restriction	name:Synonym:neuronal lineage restriction	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a neuron.
0048865	name:Name:stem cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a stem cell.
0055059	name:Name:asymmetric neuroblast division	info:Definition:The process resulting in the physical partitioning and separation of a neuroblast into two daughter cells with different developmental potentials.
0060015	name:Name:granulosa cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The cell fate commitment of precursor cells that will become granulosa cells.
0060581	name:Name:cell fate commitment involved in pattern specification	info:Definition:The commitment of cells to specific cell fates and their capacity to differentiate into particular kinds of cells within a field of cells that will exhibit a certain pattern of differentiation. Positional information is established through protein signals that emanate from a localized source within a developmental field resulting in specification of a cell type. Those signals are then interpreted in a cell-autonomous manner resulting in the determination of the cell type.
0060795	name:Name:cell fate commitment involved in formation of primary germ layers	info:Definition:The commitment of cells to specific cell fates of the endoderm, ectoderm and mesoderm as a part of gastrulation.
0060898	name:Name:eye field cell fate commitment involved in camera-type eye formation	info:Definition:The commitment of neurectodermal cells to cells of the eye field and their capacity to differentiate into eye field cells. Eye field cells are neurectodermal cells that will form the optic placode.
0060911	name:Name:cardiac cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of cells to specific cardiac cell fates and their capacity to differentiate into cardiac cells. Cardiac cells are cells that comprise the organ which pumps blood through the circulatory system.
0070308	name:Name:lens fiber cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:lens fibre cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a lens fiber cell. A lens fiber cell is any of the elongated, tightly packed cells that make up the bulk of the mature lens in a camera-type eye.
0072146	name:Name:DCT cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:distal convoluted tubule cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a distal convoluted tubule cell.
0072148	name:Name:epithelial cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into an epithelial cell.
0072150	name:Name:juxtaglomerulus cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a juxtaglomerulus cell.
0072151	name:Name:mesangial cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a mesangial cell.
0072153	name:Name:renal interstitial cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:kidney interstitial cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into a renal interstitial cell.
0072154	name:Name:proximal convoluted tubule segment 1 cell fate commitment	name:Synonym:S1 cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the developmental fate of a cell becomes restricted such that it will develop into an S1 cell in the kidney.
0072325	name:Name:vulval cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The process in which the cellular identity of nematode vulval cells is acquired and determined. In nematodes, the vulva is formed from ventral epidermal cells during larval stages to give rise to a fully formed adult vulva, which is the egg-laying organ of female and hermaphrodite nematodes.
0090106	name:Name:pancreatic E cell fate commitment	info:Definition:The commitment of a cell to a pancreatic E cell fate and its capacity to differentiate into a pancreatic E cell.
0048468	name:Name:cell development	name:Synonym:terminal differentiation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a specific fate.
0001410	name:Name:chlamydospore formation	name:Synonym:chlamydospore development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the chlamydospore over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A chlamydospores is a mitotic (asexual) one-celled spore, produced primarily for survival, not dispersal, originating endogenously and singly within part of a pre-existing cell and possessing an inner secondary and often thickened cell wall. An example of this is found in Candida albicans.
0002063	name:Name:chondrocyte development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a chondrocyte over time, from its commitment to its mature state. Chondrocyte development does not include the steps involved in committing a chondroblast to a chondrocyte fate.
0002064	name:Name:epithelial cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an epithelial cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An epithelial cell is a cell usually found in a two-dimensional sheet with a free surface.
0002076	name:Name:osteoblast development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an osteoblast over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Osteoblast development does not include the steps involved in committing a cranial neural crest cell or an osteoprogenitor cell to an osteoblast fate. An osteoblast is a cell that gives rise to bone.
0003322	name:Name:pancreatic A cell development	name:Synonym:pancreatic alpha cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pancreatic A cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A pancreatic A cell is a cell in the pancreas that secretes glucagon.
0003323	name:Name:type B pancreatic cell development	name:Synonym:pancreatic B cell development	name:Synonym:pancreatic beta cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a type B pancreatic cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A type B pancreatic cell is a cell located towards center of the islets of Langerhans that secretes insulin.
0003324	name:Name:pancreatic D cell development	name:Synonym:pancreatic delta cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pancreatic delta cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A delta cell is a cell of the pancreas that produces somatostatin.
0003325	name:Name:pancreatic PP cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pancreatic PP cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A pancreatic polypeptide-producing cell is a cell in the pancreas that produces pancreatic polypeptide.
0007438	name:Name:oenocyte development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the oenocyte over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The oenocytes are large secretory cells found in clusters underlying the epidermis of larval abdominal segments.
0007516	name:Name:hemocyte development	name:Synonym:arthropod blood cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hemocyte over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen.
0010441	name:Name:guard cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the guard cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0014019	name:Name:neuroblast development	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a neuroblast over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific state, to the mature neuroblast. It does not include processes where the neuroblast turns into a glial cell or a neuron.
0014031	name:Name:mesenchymal cell development	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a mesenchymal cell over time, from initial commitment of the cell to its specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0014904	name:Name:myotube cell development	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a myotube cell over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell. Myotubes are multinucleated cells that are formed when proliferating myoblasts exit the cell cycle, differentiate and fuse.
0021782	name:Name:glial cell development	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a glial cell over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0035855	name:Name:megakaryocyte development	name:Synonym:megakaryocyte cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a megakaryocyte cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Megakaryocyte development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a megakaryocyte fate. A megakaryocyte is a giant cell 50 to 100 micron in diameter, with a greatly lobulated nucleus, found in the bone marrow.
0035856	name:Name:eosinophil development	name:Synonym:eosinophil cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an eosinophil cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a eosinophil cell fate.
0048627	name:Name:myoblast development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the myoblast over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0048666	name:Name:neuron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a neuron over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0048821	name:Name:erythrocyte development	name:Synonym:RBC development	name:Synonym:red blood cell development	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of an erythrocyte over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0048864	name:Name:stem cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stem cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to its specific fate.
0055001	name:Name:muscle cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a muscle cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Muscle cell development does not include the steps involved in committing an unspecified cell to the muscle cell fate.
0055006	name:Name:cardiac cell development	name:Synonym:heart cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a cardiac cell over time, from its formation to the mature state. A cardiac cell is a cell that will form part of the cardiac organ of an individual.
0060016	name:Name:granulosa cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a granulosa cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a granulosa cell fate.
0060035	name:Name:notochord cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a notochord cell over time, from its formation to its mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a specific fate.
0060130	name:Name:thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell development	name:Synonym:beta-basophil development	name:Synonym:thyroid stimulating hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:thyrotrope development	name:Synonym:thyrotroph development	name:Synonym:TSH-secreting cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting cell is a basophil cell of the anterior pituitary that produces thyroid stimulating hormone, thyrotrophin.
0060131	name:Name:corticotropin hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotrophic hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:adrenocorticotropic hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:corticotrope development	name:Synonym:corticotroph development	name:Synonym:corticotrophin hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:corticotropin hormone secreting cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a corticotropic hormone secreting cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An corticotropic hormone secreting cell is a basophil cell of the anterior pituitary that produces corticotropin.
0060132	name:Name:prolactin secreting cell development	name:Synonym:epsilon-acidophil development	name:Synonym:lactotrope development	name:Synonym:lactotroph development	name:Synonym:lactotropic cell development	name:Synonym:mammotrope development	name:Synonym:mammotroph development	name:Synonym:mammotrophic cell development	name:Synonym:mammotropic cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a prolactin secreting cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A prolactin secreting cell is an acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces prolactin.
0060133	name:Name:somatotropin secreting cell development	name:Synonym:growth hormone secreting cell development	name:Synonym:somatotrope development	name:Synonym:somatotroph development	name:Synonym:somatotrophin secreting cell development	name:Synonym:somatotropic cell development	name:Synonym:somatrophic cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a somatotropin secreting cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A somatotropin secreting cell is an acidophilic cell of the anterior pituitary that produces growth hormone, somatotropin.
0060719	name:Name:chorionic trophoblast cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the chorionic trophoblast over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a specific fate.
0060856	name:Name:establishment of blood-brain barrier	name:Synonym:establishment of BBB	info:Definition:Establishment of the barrier between the blood and the brain. The cells in the brain are packed tightly together preventing the passage of most molecules from the blood into the brain. Only lipid soluble molecules or those that are actively transported can pass through the blood-brain barrier.
0070285	name:Name:pigment cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pigment cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a pigment cell fate.
0070307	name:Name:lens fiber cell development	name:Synonym:lens fibre cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a lens fiber cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cell development does not include the steps involved in committing a cell to a lens fiber cell fate. A lens fiber cell is any of the elongated, tightly packed cells that make up the bulk of the mature lens in a camera-type eye.
0072140	name:Name:DCT cell development	name:Synonym:distal convoluted tubule cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a distal convoluted tubule cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072141	name:Name:renal interstitial cell development	name:Synonym:kidney interstitial cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a renal interstitial cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072142	name:Name:juxtaglomerulus cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a juxtaglomerulus cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072143	name:Name:mesangial cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a mesangial cell in the kidney over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072145	name:Name:proximal convoluted tubule segment 1 cell development	name:Synonym:S1 cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an S1 cell in the kidney over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0080147	name:Name:root hair cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a root hair cell over time, from its formation to the mature state.
0090105	name:Name:pancreatic E cell development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pancreatic E cell over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0090393	name:Name:sepal giant cell development	name:Synonym:sepal giant cell formation	info:Definition:The process aimed at the progression of a sepal giant cell over time, from initial commitment of the cell to a specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0048469	name:Name:cell maturation	name:Synonym:functional differentiation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a cell to attain its fully functional state.
0002070	name:Name:epithelial cell maturation	info:Definition:The developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an epithelial cell to attain its fully functional state. An epithelial cell is a cell usually found in a two-dimensional sheet with a free surface.
0042551	name:Name:neuron maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a neuron to attain its fully functional state.
0043249	name:Name:erythrocyte maturation	name:Synonym:RBC maturation	name:Synonym:red blood cell maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an erythrocyte to attain its fully functional state.
0048628	name:Name:myoblast maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a myoblast to attain its fully functional state. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0048764	name:Name:trichoblast maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a trichoblast cell to attain its fully functional state.
0072560	name:Name:type B pancreatic cell maturation	name:Synonym:pancreatic B cell maturation	name:Synonym:pancreatic beta cell maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a type B pancreatic cell to attain its fully functional state. A type B pancreatic cell is a cell located towards center of the islets of Langerhans that secretes insulin.
0071998	name:Name:ascospore release from ascus	name:Synonym:ascospore liberation	info:Definition:A developmental process that results in the discharge of ascospores from the ascus. Ascospore release may be active or passive.
0051301	name:Name:cell division	info:Definition:The process resulting in the physical partitioning and separation of a cell into daughter cells.
0003423	name:Name:growth plate cartilage chondrocyte division	info:Definition:The process resulting in the oriented physical partitioning and separation of a chondrocytes in the growth plate.
0008356	name:Name:asymmetric cell division	name:Synonym:asymmetric cytokinesis	name:Synonym:asymmetrical cell division	name:Synonym:asymmetrical cytokinesis	info:Definition:The asymmetric division of cells to produce two daughter cells with different developmental potentials. It is of fundamental significance for the generation of cell diversity.
0010070	name:Name:zygote asymmetric cell division	name:Synonym:zygote asymmetric cytokinesis	info:Definition:The division of the zygote into two daughter cells that will adopt developmentally distinct potentials.
0014833	name:Name:satellite cell asymmetric division	info:Definition:The asymmetric division of a satellite cell that occurs when a satellite cell divides to produce two daughter cells, one of which is destined to differentiate and the other to be a quiescent cell that restocks the satellite cell pool. Satellite cells are quiescent adult muscle stem cells that become activated to divide and differentiate in response to muscle damage.
0045035	name:Name:sensory organ precursor cell division	name:Synonym:sense organ precursor cell division	info:Definition:The series of four asymmetric divisions undergone by the sensory organ precursor cells to generate cells that have distinct cell fates. For example, in the external sensory organ, the precursor cells give rise to one multidendritic neuron and four additional cells (the socket, shaft, sheath cells and the external sense neuron).
0010481	name:Name:epidermal cell division	name:Synonym:hypodermal cell division	info:Definition:Any process resulting in the physical partitioning and separation of an epidermal cell, any of the cells making up the epidermis, into daughter cells.
0014872	name:Name:myoblast division	info:Definition:The process resulting in the physical partitioning and separation of a myoblast into daughter cells. A myoblast is a mononucleate cell type that, by fusion with other myoblasts, gives rise to the myotubes that eventually develop into skeletal muscle fibers.
0017145	name:Name:stem cell division	name:Synonym:stem cell renewal	info:Definition:The self-renewing division of a stem cell. A stem cell is an undifferentiated cell, in the embryo or adult, that can undergo unlimited division and give rise to one or several different cell types.
0048103	name:Name:somatic stem cell division	name:Synonym:somatic stem cell renewal	info:Definition:The self-renewing division of a somatic stem cell, a stem cell that can give rise to cell types of the body other than those of the germ-line.
0020014	name:Name:schizogony	info:Definition:Cell division by multiple fission in which nuclei and other organelles in the parent cell divide repeatedly and move to the cell periphery before internal membranes develop around them, producing a large number of daughter cells simultaneously.
0021864	name:Name:radial glial cell division in forebrain	info:Definition:The mitotic division of radial glial cells in the developing forebrain.
0021865	name:Name:symmetric radial glial cell division in forebrain	info:Definition:The mitotic division of a radial glial cell giving rise to two new radial glial cells in the forebrain.
0021866	name:Name:asymmetric radial glial cell division in forebrain	info:Definition:The mitotic cell division of a radial glial cell giving rise to a radial glial cell and another cell type.
0022014	name:Name:radial glial cell division in subpallium	info:Definition:The division of a radial glial cell in the subpallium. A radial glial cell is a precursor cell that gives rise to neurons and astrocytes.
0021869	name:Name:forebrain ventricular zone progenitor cell division	info:Definition:The mitotic division of a basal progenitor giving rise to two neurons.
0021847	name:Name:ventricular zone neuroblast division	name:Synonym:neuroblast division in ventricular zone	info:Definition:The proliferation of neuroblasts in the ventricular zone of the cerebral cortex. The neuronal progenitors of these cells will migrate radially.
0022015	name:Name:radial glial cell division in pallium	info:Definition:The division of a radial glial cell in the pallium. A radial glial cell is a precursor cell that gives rise to neurons and astrocytes.
0040016	name:Name:embryonic cleavage	info:Definition:The first few specialized divisions of an activated animal egg.
0048860	name:Name:glioblast division	info:Definition:The process resulting in the physical partitioning and separation of a glioblast into daughter cells.
0021850	name:Name:subpallium glioblast cell division	name:Synonym:glioblast cell division in subpallium	name:Synonym:glioblast division in ventral telencephalon	info:Definition:The division of glioblasts in the subpallium. These cells will give rise to oligodendrocytes.
0022016	name:Name:pallium glioblast division	name:Synonym:glioblast cell division in pallium	info:Definition:The division of a glioblast in the pallium. A glioblast is a dividing precursor cell that gives rise to glial cells.
0051641	name:Name:cellular localization	name:Synonym:cellular localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of cellular localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of localization in cell or cell membrane	name:Synonym:intracellular localization	name:Synonym:localization within cell	info:Definition:A localization process that takes place at the cellular level; as a result of a cellular localization process, a substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within or in the membrane of a cell.
0034397	name:Name:telomere localization	name:Synonym:telomere localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a telomere is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0034398	name:Name:telomere tethering at nuclear periphery	info:Definition:The process in which a telomere is maintained in a specific location at the nuclear periphery.
0051640	name:Name:organelle localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of organelle localization	name:Synonym:organelle localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which an organelle is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0010381	name:Name:attachment of peroxisome to chloroplast	info:Definition:The process in which a peroxisome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a location adjacent to the chloroplast.
0032418	name:Name:lysosome localization	name:Synonym:lysosome localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a lysosome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0032439	name:Name:endosome localization	name:Synonym:endosome localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which endosomes are transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0033750	name:Name:ribosome localization	name:Synonym:ribosome localisation	info:Definition:A process in which a ribosome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0050000	name:Name:chromosome localization	name:Synonym:chromosome localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of chromosome localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of chromosome position	info:Definition:Any process in which a chromosome is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0051642	name:Name:centrosome localization	name:Synonym:centrosome localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of centrosome localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a centrosome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051643	name:Name:endoplasmic reticulum localization	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum localisation	name:Synonym:ER localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of ER localization	info:Definition:Any process in which endoplasmic reticulum is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051644	name:Name:plastid localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of plastid localization	name:Synonym:plastid localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a plastid is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051645	name:Name:Golgi localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of Golgi localization	name:Synonym:Golgi apparatus localization	name:Synonym:Golgi body localization	name:Synonym:Golgi localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which the Golgi is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051646	name:Name:mitochondrion localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of mitochondria localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of mitochondrion localization	name:Synonym:localization of mitochondria	name:Synonym:localization of mitochondrion	name:Synonym:mitochondria localization	name:Synonym:mitochondrial localization	name:Synonym:mitochondrion localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a mitochondrion or mitochondria are transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051647	name:Name:nucleus localization	name:Synonym:cell nucleus localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of nucleus localization	name:Synonym:localization of nucleus	name:Synonym:nucleus localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which the nucleus is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0051648	name:Name:vesicle localization	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic vesicle localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of vesicle localization	name:Synonym:vesicle localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a vesicle or vesicles are transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0060151	name:Name:peroxisome localization	name:Synonym:peroxisome localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a peroxisome is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location. A peroxisome is a small membrane-bounded organelle that uses dioxygen (O2) to oxidize organic molecules.
0051666	name:Name:actin cortical patch localization	name:Synonym:actin cortical patch localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of actin cortical patch localization	info:Definition:Any process in which actin cortical patches are transported to, or maintained in, a specific location. An actin cortical patch is a discrete actin-containing structure found just beneath the plasma membrane in fungal cells.
0051668	name:Name:localization within membrane	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of localization in membrane	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of position in membrane	name:Synonym:localisation within membrane	name:Synonym:localization to membrane	name:Synonym:positioning within membrane	info:Definition:Any process in which a substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within a membrane.
0051205	name:Name:protein insertion into membrane	name:Synonym:integral membrane protein localization	name:Synonym:integral membrane protein positioning	name:Synonym:membrane protein localization	name:Synonym:membrane protein positioning	name:Synonym:protein-membrane insertion	info:Definition:The process that results in the incorporation of a protein into a biological membrane.
0051664	name:Name:nuclear pore localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of nuclear pore localization	name:Synonym:nuclear pore localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which nuclear pores are transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0051665	name:Name:membrane raft localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of membrane raft localization	name:Synonym:lipid raft localization	name:Synonym:membrane raft localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which membrane rafts are transported to, or maintained in, a specific location. Membrane rafts are small (10-200 nm), heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched membrane domains that compartmentalize cellular processes.
0070058	name:Name:tRNA gene clustering	info:Definition:The process in which tRNA genes, which are not linearly connected on the chromosome, are transported in three dimensions to, and maintained together in, the nucleolus. This clustered positioning leads to transcriptional silencing of nearby RNA polymerase II promoters (termed tRNA gene mediated (tgm) silencing) in S. cerevisiae.
0070631	name:Name:spindle pole body localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of spindle pole body localization	name:Synonym:spindle pole body localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a spindle pole body is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location. A spindle pole body is a type of microtubule organizing center found in fungal cells.
0070632	name:Name:establishment of spindle pole body localization	name:Synonym:establishment of spindle pole body localisation	name:Synonym:spindle pole body positioning	info:Definition:Any process in which a spindle pole body is transported to a specific location. A spindle pole body is a type of microtubule organizing center found in fungal cells.
0071789	name:Name:spindle pole body localization in nuclear envelope	name:Synonym:spindle pole body anchorage	name:Synonym:spindle pole body docking	name:Synonym:spindle pole body localisation in nuclear envelope	info:Definition:A process in which a spindle pole body is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location in the nuclear envelope. A spindle pole body is a type of microtubule organizing center found in fungal cells.
0070727	name:Name:cellular macromolecule localization	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecule localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a macromolecule is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location at the level of a cell. Localization at the cellular level encompasses movement within the cell, from within the cell to the cell surface, or from one location to another at the surface of a cell.
0008298	name:Name:intracellular mRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of intracellular RNA localization	name:Synonym:intracellular mRNA localisation	name:Synonym:intracellular mRNA positioning	name:Synonym:mRNA localization, intracellular	name:Synonym:mRNA positioning, intracellular	info:Definition:Any process in which mRNA is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location within the cell.
0034613	name:Name:cellular protein localization	name:Synonym:cellular protein localisation	name:Synonym:channel localizer activity	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location at the level of a cell. Localization at the cellular level encompasses movement within the cell, from within the cell to the cell surface, or from one location to another at the surface of a cell.
0052543	name:Name:callose deposition in cell wall	name:Synonym:callose localization in cell wall	name:Synonym:cell wall callose deposition	name:Synonym:cell wall callose localization	info:Definition:Any process in which callose is transported to, and/or maintained in, the cell wall. Callose is a linear 1,3-beta-d-glucan formed from UDP-glucose and is found in certain plant cell walls.
0071166	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex localization	name:Synonym:cellular ribonucleoprotein complex localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of ribonucleoprotein complex localization	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex localisation	name:Synonym:RNP localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a ribonucleoprotein complex is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location within a cell.
0071167	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex import into nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex import into cell nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex nucleus import	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex targeting to nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex transport from cytoplasm to nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein import into nucleus	name:Synonym:RNP import into nucleus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a ribonucleoprotein complex from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
0071426	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex export from nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex export from cell nucleus	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex nucleus export	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex transport from nucleus to cytoplasm	name:Synonym:RNP export from nucleus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a ribonucleoprotein complex from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
0051651	name:Name:maintenance of location in cell	name:Synonym:cellular retention	name:Synonym:cellular sequestering	name:Synonym:cellular storage	name:Synonym:intracellular retention	name:Synonym:intracellular sequestering	name:Synonym:intracellular storage	name:Synonym:maintenance of cellular localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of intracellular localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of localization in cell	name:Synonym:maintenance of localization within cell	name:Synonym:retention within cell	name:Synonym:sequestering within cell	name:Synonym:storage within cell	info:Definition:Any process in which a substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, is maintained in a specific location within, or in the membrane of, a cell, and is prevented from moving elsewhere.
0006880	name:Name:intracellular sequestering of iron ion	name:Synonym:intracellular iron ion retention	name:Synonym:intracellular iron ion sequestering	name:Synonym:intracellular iron ion sequestration	name:Synonym:intracellular iron ion storage	name:Synonym:intracellular retention of iron ion	name:Synonym:intracellular sequestration of iron ion	name:Synonym:intracellular storage of iron ion	info:Definition:The process of binding or confining iron ions in an intracellular area such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0032507	name:Name:maintenance of protein location in cell	name:Synonym:maintenance of protein localization in cell	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is maintained in a specific location within, or in the membrane of, a cell, and is prevented from moving elsewhere.
0007016	name:Name:cytoskeletal anchoring at plasma membrane	name:Synonym:cytoskeletal anchoring activity	info:Definition:A cytoskeleton organization process that directly or indirectly links cytoskeletal filaments to the plasma membrane.
0032065	name:Name:cortical protein anchoring	name:Synonym:maintenance of protein location in cell cortex	info:Definition:A process in which a protein or protein complex is maintained in a specific location in the cell cortex.
0045053	name:Name:protein retention in Golgi apparatus	name:Synonym:maintenance of protein location in Golgi apparatus	name:Synonym:protein-Golgi retention	name:Synonym:retention of protein in Golgi	info:Definition:The retention of proteins within the Golgi apparatus. Golgi-localized carbohydrate-modifying enzymes have a short N-terminal domain that faces the cytosol, a single transmembrane alpha helix, and a large C-terminal domain that faces the Golgi lumen and that contains the catalytic site. How the membrane-spanning alpha helix in a Golgi enzyme causes its localization and prevents its movement to the plasma membrane is not known.
0051220	name:Name:cytoplasmic sequestering of protein	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic retention of protein	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic sequestration of protein	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic storage of protein	name:Synonym:maintenance of protein location in cytoplasm	name:Synonym:retention of protein in cytoplasm	name:Synonym:sequestering of protein in cytoplasm	name:Synonym:sequestration of protein in cytoplasm	name:Synonym:storage of protein in cytoplasm	info:Definition:The selective interaction of a protein with specific molecules in the cytoplasm, thereby inhibiting its transport into other areas of the cell.
0072595	name:Name:maintenance of protein localization to organelle	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is maintained in a specific location a specific location on or in an organelle, and is prevented from moving elsewhere. Encompasses establishment of localization in the membrane or lumen of a membrane-bounded organelle.
0072658	name:Name:maintenance of protein location in membrane	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is maintained in a specific location in a membrane, and is prevented from moving elsewhere.
0090286	name:Name:cytoskeletal anchoring at nuclear membrane	info:Definition:The process in which cytoskeletal filaments are directly or indirectly linked to the nuclear membrane.
0043181	name:Name:vacuolar sequestering	name:Synonym:retention in vacuole	name:Synonym:sequestering in vacuole	name:Synonym:sequestration in vacuole	name:Synonym:storage in vacuole	name:Synonym:vacuolar retention	name:Synonym:vacuolar sequestration	name:Synonym:vacuolar storage	info:Definition:The process of transporting a substance into, and confining within, a vacuole.
0043182	name:Name:vacuolar sequestering of sodium ion	name:Synonym:sequestering of sodium ion (Na+) in vacuole	name:Synonym:sequestration of sodium ion (Na+) in vacuole	name:Synonym:sodium ion (Na+) retention in vacuole	name:Synonym:sodium ion (Na+) storage in vacuole	name:Synonym:vacuolar sequestering of sodium ion (Na+)	name:Synonym:vacuolar sequestration of sodium ion (Na+)	name:Synonym:vacuolar sodium ion (Na+) retention	name:Synonym:vacuolar sodium ion (Na+) storage	info:Definition:The process of transporting sodium ions into, and confining within, a vacuole.
0051657	name:Name:maintenance of organelle location	name:Synonym:maintenance of organelle localization	info:Definition:Any process in which an organelle is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051652	name:Name:maintenance of chromosome location	name:Synonym:maintenance of chromosome localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a chromosome is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051655	name:Name:maintenance of vesicle location	name:Synonym:maintenance of vesicle localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a vesicle is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051658	name:Name:maintenance of nucleus location	name:Synonym:maintenance of cell nucleus location	name:Synonym:maintenance of nucleus localization	info:Definition:Any process in which the nucleus is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051659	name:Name:maintenance of mitochondrion location	name:Synonym:maintenance of mitochondria localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of mitochondrion localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a mitochondrion is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051661	name:Name:maintenance of centrosome location	name:Synonym:maintenance of centrosome localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a centrosome is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051684	name:Name:maintenance of Golgi location	name:Synonym:maintenance of Golgi apparatus localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of Golgi body localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of Golgi localization	info:Definition:Any process in which the Golgi is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051685	name:Name:maintenance of ER location	name:Synonym:maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum localization	name:Synonym:maintenance of ER localization	info:Definition:Any process in which the endoplasmic reticulum is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051687	name:Name:maintenance of spindle location	name:Synonym:maintenance of spindle localization	info:Definition:Any process in which the spindle is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051688	name:Name:maintenance of plastid location	name:Synonym:maintenance of plastid localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a plastid is maintained in a specific location within a cell and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051716	name:Name:cellular response to stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus. The process begins with detection of the stimulus by a cell and ends with a change in state or activity or the cell.
0007165	name:Name:signal transduction	name:Synonym:signaling cascade	name:Synonym:signaling pathway	name:Synonym:signalling cascade	name:Synonym:signalling pathway	info:Definition:The cellular process in which a signal is conveyed to trigger a change in the activity or state of a cell. Signal transduction begins with reception of a signal, e.g. a ligand binding to a receptor or receptor activation by a stimulus such as light, and ends with regulation of a downstream cellular process, e.g. regulation of transcription or regulation of a metabolic process. Signal transduction covers signaling from receptors located on the surface of the cell, and signaling via molecules located within the cell. For signaling between cells, signal transduction is restricted to events at and within the receiving cell.
0000160	name:Name:two-component signal transduction system (phosphorelay)	name:Synonym:histidyl-aspartyl phosphorelay	info:Definition:A conserved series of molecular signals found in prokaryotes and eukaryotes; involves autophosphorylation of a histidine kinase and the transfer of the phosphate group to an aspartate that then acts as a phospho-donor to response regulator proteins.
0001402	name:Name:signal transduction involved in filamentous growth	name:Synonym:MAPKKK cascade (pseudohyphal growth)	name:Synonym:signal transduction during filamentous growth	info:Definition:Relaying of environmental signals promoting filamentous growth.
0002764	name:Name:immune response-regulating signaling pathway	name:Synonym:immune response-regulating signalling pathway	info:Definition:The cascade of processes by which a signal interacts with a receptor, causing a change in the level or activity of a second messenger or other downstream target, and ultimately leading to the activation, perpetuation, or inhibition of an immune response.
0003376	name:Name:sphingolipid signaling pathway	name:Synonym:sphingolipid signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by a sphingolipid.
0006984	name:Name:ER-nucleus signaling pathway	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling pathway	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum-nuclear signaling pathway	name:Synonym:ER to nucleus signaling pathway	name:Synonym:ER to nucleus signalling pathway	name:Synonym:ER-nuclear signaling pathway	name:Synonym:ER-nuclear signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any series of molecular signals that conveys information from the endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus, usually resulting in a change in transcriptional regulation.
0007166	name:Name:cell surface receptor linked signaling pathway	name:Synonym:cell surface receptor linked signal transduction	name:Synonym:cell surface receptor linked signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any series of molecular signals initiated by the binding of an extracellular ligand to a receptor on the surface of the target cell.
0007231	name:Name:osmosensory signaling pathway	name:Synonym:osmolarity sensing	name:Synonym:osmolarity sensing signaling pathway	name:Synonym:osmolarity sensing signalling pathway	name:Synonym:osmosensory signalling pathway	name:Synonym:signal transduction during osmotic stress	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals initiated in response to osmotic change.
0007263	name:Name:nitric oxide mediated signal transduction	name:Synonym:nitric oxide-mediated signal transduction	name:Synonym:NO mediated signal transduction	name:Synonym:NO-mediated signal transduction	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by the detection of nitric oxide (NO).
0007602	name:Name:phototransduction	name:Synonym:opsin	name:Synonym:phototransduction, visible light, light adaptation	name:Synonym:phototrophin mediated phototransduction	info:Definition:The sequence of reactions within a cell required to convert absorbed photons into a molecular signal.
0009755	name:Name:hormone-mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:hormone mediated signalling	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by the detection of a hormone.
0009756	name:Name:carbohydrate mediated signaling	name:Synonym:carbohydrate mediated signalling	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by the detection of carbohydrate.
0009863	name:Name:salicylic acid mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:salicylic acid mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by salicylic acid.
0009867	name:Name:jasmonic acid mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:jasmonic acid mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by jasmonic acid.
0010017	name:Name:red or far-red light signaling pathway	name:Synonym:phytochrome signaling pathway	name:Synonym:red or far red light signalling pathway	name:Synonym:red or far-red light signaling pathway	name:Synonym:red/far red light signaling pathway	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals initiated upon sensing by photoreceptor molecules of red light or far red light. Red light is electromagnetic radiation of wavelength of 580-700nm. Far red light is electromagnetic radiation of wavelength 700-800nm. An example of this response is seen at the beginning of many plant species developmental stages. These include germination, and the point when cotyledon expansion is triggered. In certain species these processes take place in response to absorption of red light by the pigment molecule phytochrome, but the signal can be reversed by exposure to far red light. During the initial phase the phytochrome molecule is only present in the red light absorbing form, but on absorption of red light it changes to a far red light absorbing form, triggering progress through development. An immediate short period of exposure to far red light entirely returns the pigment to its initial state and prevents triggering of the developmental process. A thirty minute break between red and subsequent far red light exposure renders the red light effect irreversible, and development then occurs regardless of whether far red light exposure subsequently occurs.
0010019	name:Name:chloroplast-nucleus signaling pathway	name:Synonym:chloroplast-nucleus signalling pathway	info:Definition:The process in which a molecular signal is transduced between the chloroplast and nucleus, such that expression of nuclear encoding photosynthetic proteins is coupled with chloroplast biogenesis.
0010850	name:Name:chemoreceptor signaling pathway involved in regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:chemoreceptor signalling pathway involved in regulation of blood pressure	info:Definition:A series of reactions within the cell that occur as a result of a single trigger reaction or compound interacting with a chemoreceptor resulting in a modulation of the force with which blood travels through the circulatory system. Chemoreceptors respond to oxygen, carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions.
0023014	name:Name:signal transduction via phosphorylation event	name:Synonym:signal transmission via phosphorylation event	info:Definition:The process in which a signal is conveyed via the transfer of one or more phosphate groups.
0023019	name:Name:signal transduction involved in regulation of gene expression	name:Synonym:regulation of gene expression as a consequence of signal transmission	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of gene expression as a consequence of a process in which a signal is released and/or conveyed from one location to another.
0023041	name:Name:neuronal signal transduction	info:Definition:The process in which an activated neuronal cell receptor conveys information down a signaling pathway, resulting in a change in the function or state of a cell. This process may be intracellular or intercellular.
0023045	name:Name:signal transduction via conformational transition	name:Synonym:signal transmission via conformational transition	info:Definition:The process whereby a signal is passed on within a cell by triggering a conformational change in the molecule that is receiving the signal.
0030522	name:Name:intracellular receptor mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:intracellular receptor-mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:intracellular receptor-mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any series of molecular signals initiated by a ligand binding to an receptor located within a cell.
0031930	name:Name:mitochondria-nucleus signaling pathway	name:Synonym:mitochondrial signaling pathway	name:Synonym:mitochondrial signalling pathway	name:Synonym:retrograde response	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals that forms a pathway of communication from the mitochondria to the nucleus and initiates cellular changes in response to changes in mitochondrial function.
0035556	name:Name:intracellular signal transduction	name:Synonym:intracellular signal transduction pathway	name:Synonym:intracellular signaling cascade	name:Synonym:intracellular signaling chain	name:Synonym:intracellular signaling pathway	name:Synonym:signal transduction via intracellular signaling cascade	name:Synonym:signal transmission via intracellular cascade	info:Definition:The process in which a signal is passed on to downstream components within the cell, which become activated themselves to further propagate the signal and finally trigger a change in the function or state of the cell.
0055095	name:Name:lipoprotein particle mediated signaling	name:Synonym:lipoprotein mediated signalling 	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by the detection of a lipoprotein particle.
0060395	name:Name:SMAD protein signal transduction	info:Definition:The cascade of processes by which a signal interacts with a receptor, causing a change in the activity of a SMAD protein, and ultimately effecting a change in the functioning of the cell.
0060863	name:Name:regulation of floral organ abscission by signal transduction	info:Definition:The cascade of processes by which a signal interacts with a receptor, causing a change in the level or activity of a second messenger or other downstream target, and ultimately modulating the rate, or extent of floral organ abscission.
0071588	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:H2O2 mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:hydrogen peroxide mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals mediated by the detection of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
2000803	name:Name:endosomal signal transduction	name:Synonym:endosome-based signaling	name:Synonym:signaling cascade in endosome	name:Synonym:signaling from endosome	name:Synonym:signaling pathway in endosome	name:Synonym:signalling cascade in endosome	name:Synonym:signalling pathway in endosome	info:Definition:The process in which a signal is passed on to downstream components located at the endosome. Endosomes can provide important intracellular signaling platforms and provide spatial and temporal control over signal transduction.
0033554	name:Name:cellular response to stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress. The stress is usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0002818	name:Name:intracellular defense response	name:Synonym:intracellular defence response	info:Definition:A physiological defense response which occurs intracellularly.
0006974	name:Name:response to DNA damage stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular DNA damage response	name:Synonym:cellular response to DNA damage stimulus	name:Synonym:DNA damage response	name:Synonym:response to genotoxic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating damage to its DNA from environmental insults or errors during metabolism.
0009267	name:Name:cellular response to starvation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of deprivation of nourishment.
0010690	name:Name:negative regulation of ribosomal protein gene transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter in response to stress	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the frequency, rate or extent of the synthesis of RNA from ribosomal protein genes by RNA polymerase II, originating at an RNA polymerase II promoter, as a result of a disturbance in organismal or cellular homeostasis.
0031098	name:Name:stress-activated protein kinase signaling cascade	name:Synonym:JNK signaling pathway	name:Synonym:JNK signalling pathway	name:Synonym:SAPK signaling pathway	name:Synonym:SAPK signalling pathway	name:Synonym:stress-activated protein kinase signaling pathway	name:Synonym:stress-activated protein kinase signalling pathway	info:Definition:A series of molecular signals in which a stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) cascade relays one or more of the signals.
0031102	name:Name:neuron projection regeneration	name:Synonym:neurite regeneration	info:Definition:The regrowth of neuronal processes such as axons or dendrites in response to their loss or damage.
0034599	name:Name:cellular response to oxidative stress	name:Synonym:adaptive response to oxidative stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of oxidative stress, a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of reactive oxygen species, e.g. superoxide anions, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals.
0034605	name:Name:cellular response to heat	name:Synonym:cellular response to heat stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a heat stimulus, a temperature stimulus above the optimal temperature for that organism.
0034976	name:Name:response to endoplasmic reticulum stress	name:Synonym:ER stress response	name:Synonym:response to ER stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress usually results from the accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the ER lumen.
0035901	name:Name:cellular response to isolation stress	name:Synonym:cellular response to social isolation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lack of contact with other members of the same species.
0035903	name:Name:cellular response to immobilization stress	name:Synonym:cellular response to immobilisation stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of being rendered immobile.
0035967	name:Name:cellular response to topologically incorrect protein	name:Synonym:cellular response to misfolded or unfolded protein	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a protein that is not folded in its correct three-dimensional structure.
0043555	name:Name:regulation of translation in response to stress	name:Synonym:translational stress response	info:Definition:Modulation of the frequency, rate or extent of translation as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress. The stress is usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0043620	name:Name:regulation of DNA-dependent transcription in response to stress	info:Definition:Modulation of the frequency, rate or extent of transcription from a DNA template as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress. The stress is usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0052482	name:Name:defense response by cell wall thickening	name:Synonym:cell wall thickening during defense response	info:Definition:A type of cell wall modification, in which the cell wall is reinforced and made thicker, that occurs as part of the defense response of an organism.
0070413	name:Name:trehalose metabolism in response to stress	name:Synonym:trehalose metabolic process involved in response to stress	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways involving trehalose that occur as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress.
0070417	name:Name:cellular response to cold	name:Synonym:cellular response to cold stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cold stimulus, a temperature stimulus below the optimal temperature for that organism.
0071454	name:Name:cellular response to anoxia	name:Synonym:cellular response to anaerobic conditions	name:Synonym:cellular response to anoxic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating a decline in oxygen levels to trace amounts, <0.1%.
0071455	name:Name:cellular response to hyperoxia	name:Synonym:cellular response to hyperoxic stress	name:Synonym:cellular response to increased oxygen tension	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating increased oxygen tension.
0071456	name:Name:cellular response to hypoxia	name:Synonym:cellular response to hypoxic stress	name:Synonym:cellular response to lowered oxygen tension	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating lowered oxygen tension. Hypoxia, defined as a decline in O2 levels below normoxic levels of 20.8 - 20.95%, results in metabolic adaptation at both the cellular and organismal level.
0071464	name:Name:cellular response to hydrostatic pressure	name:Synonym:cellular response to biomechanical stress	name:Synonym:cellular response to static fluid pressure	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a hydrostatic pressure stimulus. Hydrostatic pressure is the force acting on an object in a system where the fluid is at rest (as opposed to moving). The weight of the fluid above the object creates pressure on it.
0071470	name:Name:cellular response to osmotic stress	name:Synonym:cellular osmotic response	name:Synonym:cellular osmotic stress response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of solutes outside the organism or cell.
0071498	name:Name:cellular response to fluid shear stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a fluid shear stress stimulus. Fluid shear stress is the force acting on an object in a system where the fluid is moving across a solid surface.
0071500	name:Name:cellular response to nitrosative stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitrosative stress stimulus. Nitrosative stress is a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of nitric oxide (NO) or the highly reactive oxidant peroxynitrite, which is produced following interaction of NO with superoxide anions.
0071501	name:Name:cellular response to sterol depletion	name:Synonym:cellular sterol depletion response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating deprivation of sterols. Sterols are a group of steroids characterized by the presence of one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0070887	name:Name:cellular response to chemical stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a chemical stimulus.
0002007	name:Name:detection of hypoxic conditions in blood by chemoreceptor signaling	name:Synonym:detection of hypoxic conditions in blood by chemoreceptor signalling	info:Definition:The process in which information about a lack of oxygen are received and are converted to a molecular signal by chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and the aortic bodies.
0006981	name:Name:activation of SoxR protein	info:Definition:The conversion of the SoxR transcription factor to its active (oxidized) form.
0021792	name:Name:chemoattraction of branchiomotor axon	name:Synonym:positive chemotaxis of branchiomotor axon	info:Definition:The process in which a branchiomotor neuron growth cone is directed to a specific target site in response to an attractive chemical signal. Branchiomotor neurons are located in the hindbrain and innervate branchial arch-derived muscles that control jaw movements, facial expression, the larynx, and the pharynx.
0021793	name:Name:chemorepulsion of branchiomotor axon	name:Synonym:negative chemotaxis of branchiomotor axon	info:Definition:The process in which a branchiomotor neuron growth cone is directed to a specific target site in response to a repulsive chemical cue. Branchiomotor neurons are located in the hindbrain and innervate branchial arch-derived muscles that control jaw movements, facial expression, the larynx, and the pharynx.
0031670	name:Name:cellular response to nutrient	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nutrient stimulus.
0035690	name:Name:cellular response to drug	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a drug stimulus. A drug is a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease.
0060326	name:Name:cell chemotaxis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell guided by a specific chemical concentration gradient. Movement may be towards a higher concentration (positive chemotaxis) or towards a lower concentration (negative chemotaxis).
0071229	name:Name:cellular response to acid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an acid stimulus.
0071236	name:Name:cellular response to antibiotic	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an antibiotic stimulus. An antibiotic is a chemical substance produced by a microorganism which has the capacity to inhibit the growth of or to kill other microorganisms.
0071240	name:Name:cellular response to food	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a food stimulus; food is anything which, when taken into the body, serves to nourish or build up the tissues or to supply body heat.
0071241	name:Name:cellular response to inorganic substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an inorganic substance stimulus.
0071310	name:Name:cellular response to organic substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an organic substance stimulus.
0071453	name:Name:cellular response to oxygen levels	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus reflecting the presence, absence, or concentration of oxygen.
0071457	name:Name:cellular response to ozone	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a ozone stimulus.
0071462	name:Name:cellular response to water	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a water stimulus.
0071466	name:Name:cellular response to xenobiotic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a xenobiotic compound stimulus. Xenobiotic compounds are compounds foreign to living organisms.
0080029	name:Name:cellular response to boron-containing substance levels	name:Synonym:cellular response to boron levels	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus reflecting the presence, absence, or concentration of boron-containing substances.
0071214	name:Name:cellular response to abiotic stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to abiotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an abiotic (non-living) stimulus.
0071257	name:Name:cellular response to electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to electricity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an electrical stimulus.
0071258	name:Name:cellular response to gravity	name:Synonym:cellular response to gravitational stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a gravitational stimulus.
0071259	name:Name:cellular response to magnetism	name:Synonym:cellular response to magnetic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a magnetic stimulus.
0071260	name:Name:cellular response to mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular mechanical stimulus response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a mechanical stimulus.
0071467	name:Name:cellular response to pH	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pH stimulus.
0071478	name:Name:cellular response to radiation	name:Synonym:cellular response to electromagnetic radiation stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to radiation stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an electromagnetic radiation stimulus. Electromagnetic radiation is a propagating wave in space with electric and magnetic components. These components oscillate at right angles to each other and to the direction of propagation.
0071216	name:Name:cellular response to biotic stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to biotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a biotic stimulus, a stimulus caused or produced by a living organism.
0006983	name:Name:ER overload response	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum overload response	name:Synonym:EOR	name:Synonym:ER-overload response	info:Definition:The series of molecular signals generated by the accumulation of normal or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and leading to activation of transcription by NF-kappaB.
0071217	name:Name:cellular response to external biotic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an external biotic stimulus, an external stimulus caused by, or produced by living things.
0071219	name:Name:cellular response to molecule of bacterial origin	name:Synonym:cellular response to bacteria associated molecule	name:Synonym:cellular response to bacterial associated molecule	name:Synonym:cellular response to bacterium associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of bacterial origin such as peptides derived from bacterial flagellin.
0071226	name:Name:cellular response to molecule of fungal origin	name:Synonym:cellular response to fungus associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of fungal origin such as chito-octamer oligosaccharide.
0071227	name:Name:cellular response to molecule of oomycetes origin	name:Synonym:cellular response to oomycetes associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of oomycetes origin.
0071228	name:Name:cellular response to tumor cell	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a tumor cell.
0072396	name:Name:response to cell cycle checkpoint signal	name:Synonym:cell cycle checkpoint effector process	name:Synonym:response to signal involved in cell cycle checkpoint	info:Definition:A process that acts directly to delay or stop progression through the cell cycle in response to signals generated as a result of cell cycle checkpoint signaling; contributes to a cell cycle checkpoint.
0055085	name:Name:transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which a solute is transported from one side of a membrane to the other.
0003333	name:Name:amino acid transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of amino acids, organic acids containing one or more amino substituents across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006853	name:Name:carnitine shuttle	info:Definition:The transfer of acyl groups to and from acyl-CoA molecules to form O-acylcarnitine, which can exchange across the mitochondrial inner membrane with unacylated carnitine.
0034487	name:Name:vacuolar amino acid transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:vacuolar amino acid transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which an amino acid is transported from one side of the vacuolar membrane to the other.
0035524	name:Name:proline transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proline, pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid, across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006855	name:Name:drug transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:multidrug transport	info:Definition:The process in which a drug is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015851	name:Name:nucleobase transport	name:Synonym:nucleobase transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a nucleobase, any nitrogenous base that is a constituent of a nucleoside, nucleotide, or nucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006863	name:Name:purine base transport	name:Synonym:purine base transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:purine nucleobase transport	name:Synonym:purine transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:purine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of purine bases, one of the two classes of nitrogen-containing ring compounds found in DNA and RNA, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015855	name:Name:pyrimidine base transport	name:Synonym:pyrimidine base transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:pyrimidine nucleobase transport	name:Synonym:pyrimidine transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:pyrimidine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of pyrimidine bases, one of the two classes of nitrogen-containing ring compounds found in DNA and RNA, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015878	name:Name:biotin transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B7 transport	name:Synonym:vitamin H transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of biotin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Biotin is cis-tetrahydro-2-oxothieno(3,4-d)imidazoline-4-valeric acid; the (+) enantiomer is very widely distributed in cells and serves as a carrier in a number of enzymatic beta-carboxylation reactions.
0015911	name:Name:plasma membrane long-chain fatty acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of long-chain fatty acids across the plasma membrane.
0034219	name:Name:carbohydrate transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane carbohydrate transport	info:Definition:The process in which a carbohydrate is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035428	name:Name:hexose transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of hexose across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Hexoses are any aldoses with a chain of six carbon atoms in the molecule.
0035436	name:Name:triose phosphate transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of triose phosphate across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Triose phosphate is any organic three carbon compound phosphate ester.
0072334	name:Name:UDP-galactose transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of UDP-galactose across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0034220	name:Name:ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane ion transport	info:Definition:A process in which an ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006849	name:Name:plasma membrane pyruvate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of pyruvate, 2-oxopropanoate, across a plasma membrane.
0010248	name:Name:establishment or maintenance of transmembrane electrochemical gradient	info:Definition:The directed movement of ions to establish or maintain an electrochemical gradient across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015985	name:Name:energy coupled proton transport, down electrochemical gradient	info:Definition:The transport of protons across a membrane to generate an electrochemical gradient (proton-motive force) that provides energy for the synthesis of ATP or GTP.
0015988	name:Name:energy coupled proton transport, against electrochemical gradient	info:Definition:The transport of protons against an electrochemical gradient, using energy from a source such as ATP hydrolysis, light, or electron transport.
0034755	name:Name:iron ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane iron transport	info:Definition:A process in which an iron ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035433	name:Name:acetate transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of acetate across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Acetate is the 2-carbon carboxylic acid ethanoic acid.
0035434	name:Name:copper ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of copper (Cu) ions across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035435	name:Name:phosphate transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of phosphate across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035444	name:Name:nickel ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nickel (Ni) ions across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035445	name:Name:borate transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:boron transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of borate across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Borate is the anion (BO3)3-; boron is a group 13 element, with properties which are borderline between metals and non-metals.
0035725	name:Name:sodium ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:A process in which a sodium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035873	name:Name:lactate transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lactate across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Lactate is 2-hydroxypropanoate, CH3-CHOH-COOH; L(+)-lactate is formed by anaerobic glycolysis in animal tissues, and DL-lactate is found in sour milk, molasses and certain fruit juices.
0070574	name:Name:cadmium ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane cadmium transport	info:Definition:A process in which a cadmium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0070588	name:Name:calcium ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane calcium transport	info:Definition:A process in which a calcium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071421	name:Name:manganese ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane manganese transport	info:Definition:A process in which a manganese ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071422	name:Name:succinate transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane succinate transport	info:Definition:A process in which a succinate ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071423	name:Name:malate transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane malate transport	info:Definition:A process in which a malate ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071577	name:Name:zinc ion transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:zinc transmembrane transport	info:Definition:A process in which a zinc ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071805	name:Name:potassium ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:A process in which a potassium ion is transported from one side of a membrane to the other.
0072488	name:Name:ammonium transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of ammonium across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Ammonium is the cation NH4+.
0097080	name:Name:plasma membrane selenite transport	name:Synonym:plasma membrane hydrogenselenite transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of inorganic selenite (HSeO3-1 at physiological pH) across a plasma membrane.
0034486	name:Name:vacuolar transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which a solute is transported from one side of the vacuolar membrane to the other.
0071995	name:Name:phytochelatin import into vacuole	name:Synonym:phytochelatin transport into vacuole	info:Definition:The directed movement of phytochelatins into the vacuole. Phytochelatins are a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes.
0071996	name:Name:glutathione import into vacuole	name:Synonym:glutathione transport into vacuole	info:Definition:The directed movement of glutathione into the vacuole.
0034775	name:Name:glutathione transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:transmembrane glutathione transport	info:Definition:A process in which glutathione is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035348	name:Name:acetyl-CoA transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which acetyl-CoA is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Acetyl-CoA is a derivative of coenzyme A in which the sulfhydryl group is acetylated; it is a metabolite derived from several pathways (e.g. glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation, amino-acid catabolism) and is further metabolized by the tricarboxylic acid cycle. It is a key intermediate in lipid and terpenoid biosynthesis.
0035349	name:Name:coenzyme A transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which coenzyme A is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Coenzyme A, 3'-phosphoadenosine-(5')diphospho(4')pantatheine, is an acyl carrier in many acylation and acyl-transfer reactions in which the intermediate is a thiol ester.
0035350	name:Name:FAD transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. FAD forms the coenzyme of the prosthetic group of various flavoprotein oxidoreductase enzymes, in which it functions as an electron acceptor by being reversibly converted to its reduced form.
0035351	name:Name:heme transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring, is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035352	name:Name:NAD transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore; transport may be of either the oxidized form, NAD, or the reduced form, NADH.
0035353	name:Name:nicotinamide mononucleotide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which nicotinamide mononucleotide is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Nicotinamide mononucleotide is a ribonucleotide in which the nitrogenous base, nicotinamide, is in beta-n-glycosidic linkage with the c-1 position of d-ribose. It is a constituent of NAD and NADP.
0035378	name:Name:carbon dioxide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:A process in which carbon dioxide (CO2) is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035382	name:Name:sterol transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a sterol across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Sterols are steroids with one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0035376	name:Name:sterol import	name:Synonym:sterol influx	name:Synonym:sterol uptake	info:Definition:The directed movement of a sterol into a cell or organelle. Sterols are steroids with one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0035461	name:Name:vitamin transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which a vitamin is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A vitamin is one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0015887	name:Name:pantothenate transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:pantothenate transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B5 transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of pantothenate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Pantothenate is the anion of pantothenic acid, the amide of beta-alanine and pantoic acid; it is a B complex vitamin that is a constituent of coenzyme A and is distributed ubiquitously in foods.
0031919	name:Name:vitamin B6 transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of any of the vitamin B6 compounds -- pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine and the active form, pyridoxal phosphate -- into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071934	name:Name:thiamine transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:thiamin transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of thiamine across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Thiamine is vitamin B1, a water soluble vitamin present in fresh vegetables and meats, especially liver.
0071939	name:Name:vitamin A import	name:Synonym:vitamin A uptake	info:Definition:The directed movement of vitamin A into a cell or organelle. Vitamin A is any of several retinoid derivatives of beta-carotene, primarily retinol, retinal, or retinoic acid.
0035672	name:Name:oligopeptide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of an oligopeptide across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Oligopeptides are molecules that contain a small number (2 to 20) of amino-acid residues connected by peptide linkages.
0035442	name:Name:dipeptide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a dipeptide across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A dipeptide is a combination of two amino acids linked together by a peptide (-CO-NH-) bond.
0035443	name:Name:tripeptide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a tripeptide across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A tripeptide is a compound containing three amino acids linked together by peptide bonds.
0090374	name:Name:oligopeptide export from mitochondrion	info:Definition:The directed movement of oligopeptides out of mitochondria into the cytosol by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Oligopeptides are molecules that contain a small number (2 to 20) of amino-acid residues connected by peptide linkages.
0035674	name:Name:tricarboxylic acid transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which tricarboxylic acids are transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071806	name:Name:protein transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0043952	name:Name:protein transport by the Sec complex	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the Sec complex	name:Synonym:protein translocation by the Sec complex	info:Definition:The process in which unfolded proteins are transported across the cytoplasmic membrane in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria by the Sec complex, in a process involving proteolytic cleavage of an N-terminal signal peptide.
0043953	name:Name:protein transport by the Tat complex	name:Synonym:protein secretion by the TAT complex	name:Synonym:protein translocation by the TAT complex	name:Synonym:protein translocation by the Twin-arginine translocation complex	info:Definition:The process in which folded proteins are transported across cytoplasmic membranes of bacteria and membranes of organelles derived from bacteria (chloroplasts and mitochondria) by the TAT complex.
0065002	name:Name:intracellular protein transmembrane transport	name:Synonym:intracellular membrane translocation of a protein	name:Synonym:intracellular protein transport across a membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins in a cell, from one side of a membrane to another by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071918	name:Name:urea transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which urea, the water-soluble compound H2N-CO-NH2, is transported from one side of a membrane to the other by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071994	name:Name:phytochelatin transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a phytochelatin across a membrane into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Phytochelatins are a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes.
0072489	name:Name:methylammonium transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of methylammonium across a membrane by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0072530	name:Name:purine-containing compound transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a purine-containing compound across a membrane. A purine-containing compound is any compound that contains purine or a formal derivative thereof.
0010184	name:Name:cytokinin transport	name:Synonym:cytokinin transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of cytokinins, a class of adenine-derived compounds that can function in plants as growth regulators, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015783	name:Name:GDP-fucose transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of GDP-fucose into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. GDP-fucose is a substance composed of fucose in glycosidic linkage with guanosine diphosphate.
0015784	name:Name:GDP-mannose transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of GDP-mannose into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. GDP-mannose is a substance composed of mannose in glycosidic linkage with guanosine diphosphate.
0015860	name:Name:purine nucleoside transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a purine nucleoside, a purine base covalently bonded to a ribose or deoxyribose sugar, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015865	name:Name:purine nucleotide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a purine nucleotide, any compound consisting of a purine nucleoside esterified with (ortho)phosphate, into, out of or within a cell.
0072531	name:Name:pyrimidine-containing compound transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a pyrimidine-containing compound across a membrane. A pyrimidine-containing compound is any compound that contains pyrimidine or a formal derivative thereof.
0006864	name:Name:pyrimidine nucleotide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a pyrimidine nucleotide, any compound consisting of a pyrimidine nucleoside esterified with (ortho)phosphate, into, out of or within a cell.
0015781	name:Name:pyrimidine nucleotide-sugar transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of pyrimidine nucleotide-sugars into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Pyrimidine nucleotide-sugars are pyrimidine nucleotides in glycosidic linkage with a monosaccharide or monosaccharide derivative.
0015864	name:Name:pyrimidine nucleoside transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a pyrimidine nucleoside, a pyrimidine base covalently bonded to a ribose or deoxyribose sugar, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0080170	name:Name:hydrogen peroxide transmembrane transport	info:Definition:The process in which hydrogen peroxide is transported from one side of a membrane to the other. This process includes the actual movement of the solute, and any regulation and preparatory steps, such as reduction of the solute.
0060144	name:Name:host cellular processes involved in virus induced gene silencing	info:Definition:The set of cellular processes occurring in the host cell that contribute to the process of posttranscriptional gene inactivation ('silencing') both of viral gene(s), and host gene(s) homologous to the viral genes.
0060242	name:Name:contact inhibition	info:Definition:The cellular process in which cells stop growing or dividing in response to increased cell density.
0060352	name:Name:cell adhesion molecule production	info:Definition:The appearance of a cell adhesion molecule due to biosynthesis or secretion.
0071804	name:Name:cellular potassium ion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of potassium (K) ions into, out of, or within a cell.
0071841	name:Name:cellular component organization or biogenesis at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level, and results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellular component.
0070882	name:Name:cellular cell wall organization or biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell wall organization or biogenesis at cellular level	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall organisation or biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cell wall.
0007047	name:Name:cellular cell wall organization	name:Synonym:cell wall organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell wall organization at cellular level	name:Synonym:cellular cell wall organisation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the cell wall, the rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0042546	name:Name:cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell wall assembly	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a cell wall. Includes biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, such as proteins and polysaccharides, and those macromolecular modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the cellular component. A cell wall is the rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0071669	name:Name:plant-type cell wall organization or biogenesis	name:Synonym:plant-type cell wall organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellulose- and pectin-containing cell wall.
0071852	name:Name:fungal-type cell wall organization or biogenesis	name:Synonym:fungal-type cell wall organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a fungal-type cell wall.
0071842	name:Name:cellular component organization at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level and results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellular component.
0006323	name:Name:DNA packaging	name:Synonym:DNA organisation	name:Synonym:DNA organization	info:Definition:Any process in which DNA and associated proteins are formed into a compact, orderly structure.
0006996	name:Name:organelle organization	name:Synonym:organelle organisation	name:Synonym:organelle organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an organelle within a cell. An organelle is an organized structure of distinctive morphology and function. Includes the nucleus, mitochondria, plastids, vacuoles, vesicles, ribosomes and the cytoskeleton. Excludes the plasma membrane.
0007028	name:Name:cytoplasm organization	name:Synonym:cytoplasm organisation	name:Synonym:cytoplasm organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is all of the contents of a cell excluding the plasma membrane and nucleus, but including other subcellular structures.
0030030	name:Name:cell projection organization	name:Synonym:cell projection organisation	name:Synonym:cell projection organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell surface structure organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a prolongation or process extending from a cell, e.g. a flagellum or axon.
0034621	name:Name:cellular macromolecular complex subunit organization	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecular complex organization	name:Synonym:cellular macromolecular complex subunit organisation	info:Definition:Any process carried out at the cellular level by which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a macromolecular complex.
0034994	name:Name:microtubule organizing center attachment site organization	name:Synonym:MAS organization	name:Synonym:microtubule organising centre attachment site organisation	name:Synonym:MTOC attachment site organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a microtubule organizing center attachment site. A microtubule organizing center attachment site is a region of the nuclear envelope to which a microtubule organizing center (MTOC) attaches.
0035845	name:Name:photoreceptor cell outer segment organization	name:Synonym:photoreceptor outer segment organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level and results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the outer segment of a photoreceptor cell, a sensory cell that reacts to the presence of light. The outer segment of the photoreceptor cell contains the light-absorbing materials.
0043062	name:Name:extracellular structure organization	name:Synonym:extracellular structure organisation	name:Synonym:extracellular structure organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of structures in the space external to the outermost structure of a cell. For cells without external protective or external encapsulating structures this refers to space outside of the plasma membrane, and also covers the host cell environment outside an intracellular parasite.
0043580	name:Name:periplasmic space organization	name:Synonym:periplasmic space organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the periplasmic space, the region between the inner (cytoplasmic) and outer membrane in Gram-negative bacteria, or the inner membrane and cell wall in fungi.
0071844	name:Name:cellular component assembly at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level and results in the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a cellular component.
0071845	name:Name:cellular component disassembly at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level and results in the breakdown of a cellular component.
0071956	name:Name:cellular component maintenance at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level and results in the preservation of a cellular component in a stable functional or structural state.
0072553	name:Name:terminal button organization	name:Synonym:bouton organization	name:Synonym:presynaptic bouton organization	name:Synonym:synaptic bouton organization	name:Synonym:terminal bouton organization	name:Synonym:terminal button organisation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a terminal button. A terminal button is the terminal inflated portion of the axon, containing the specialized apparatus necessary to release neurotransmitters.
0097061	name:Name:dendritic spine organization	name:Synonym:dendritic spine organisation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a dendritic spine. A dendritic spine is a specialized protrusion from a neuronal dendrite and is involved in synaptic transmission.
0071843	name:Name:cellular component biogenesis at cellular level	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level, and that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a cellular component. Includes biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, and those macromolecular modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the cellular component.
0017126	name:Name:nucleologenesis	name:Synonym:nucleolus assembly	name:Synonym:nucleolus biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a nucleolus, a small, dense body one or more of which are present in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells.
0022613	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis	name:Synonym:ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis and assembly	name:Synonym:RNA-protein complex biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a complex containing RNA and proteins. Includes the biosynthesis of the constituent RNA and protein molecules, and those macromolecular modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the ribonucleoprotein complex.
0043683	name:Name:type IV pilus biogenesis	name:Synonym:TFP biogenesis	name:Synonym:type 4 pilus biogenesis	name:Synonym:type IV fimbria assembly	name:Synonym:type IV fimbria biogenesis	name:Synonym:type IV fimbriae assembly	name:Synonym:type IV fimbriae biogenesis	name:Synonym:type IV fimbrial assembly	name:Synonym:type IV fimbrial biogenesis	name:Synonym:type IV fimbrium assembly	name:Synonym:type IV fimbrium biogenesis	name:Synonym:type IV pilus biosynthesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a type IV pilus. A type IV pilus is composed of a pilus fiber and approximately ten proteins at its base; type IV pili play a role in cell motility, adherence to substrates, and aggregation.
0044091	name:Name:membrane biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a membrane.
0061110	name:Name:dense core granule biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a dense core granule. Includes biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, and those macromolecular modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the dense core granule.
0070272	name:Name:proton-transporting ATP synthase complex biogenesis	name:Synonym:F-type ATPase complex biogenesis	info:Definition:The biogenesis of a proton-transporting ATP synthase (also known as F-type ATPase), a two-sector ATPase found in the inner membrane of mitochondria and chloroplasts, and in bacterial plasma membranes. Includes the synthesis of constituent proteins and their aggregation, arrangement and bonding together.
0080158	name:Name:chloroplast ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase complex biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a chloroplast ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RubisCO) complex. Includes the synthesis of the constituent protein molecules, and those protein modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the complex.
0015976	name:Name:carbon utilization	name:Synonym:carbon utilization by utilization of organic compounds	name:Synonym:heterotrophy	info:Definition:A series of processes that forms an integrated mechanism by which a cell or an organism detects the depletion of primary carbon sources and then activates genes to scavenge the last traces of the primary carbon source and to transport and metabolize alternative carbon sources such as carbon dioxide or carbonic acid. The utilization process begins when the cell or organism detects carbon levels, includes the activation of genes whose products detect, transport or metabolize carbon-containing substances, and ends when carbon is incorporated into the cell or organism's metabolism.
0016032	name:Name:viral reproduction	name:Synonym:viral infection	name:Synonym:viral life cycle	name:Synonym:viral replication cycle	name:Synonym:virulence	info:Definition:The process in which a virus reproduces. Usually, this is by infection of a host cell, replication of the viral genome, and assembly of progeny virus particles. In some cases the viral genetic material may integrate into the host genome and only subsequently, under particular circumstances, 'complete' its life cycle.
0016265	name:Name:death	info:Definition:A permanent cessation of all vital functions: the end of life; can be applied to a whole organism or to a part of an organism.
0016271	name:Name:tissue death	info:Definition:A permanent cessation of all vital functions of a tissue.
0007559	name:Name:histolysis	info:Definition:The breakdown of tissues; usually, if not always, accompanied by cell death, followed by the complete dissolution of dead tissue.
0035069	name:Name:larval midgut histolysis	info:Definition:The stage-specific break down of the larval midgut during Drosophila metamorphosis, to allow replacement of larval structures by tissues and structures that form the adult fly.
0035070	name:Name:salivary gland histolysis	info:Definition:The stage-specific break down of the larval salivary glands during Drosophila metamorphosis, to allow replacement of larval structures by tissues and structures that form the adult fly.
0019740	name:Name:nitrogen utilization	info:Definition:A series of processes that forms an integrated mechanism by which a cell or an organism detects the depletion of primary nitrogen source, usually ammonia, and then activates genes to scavenge the last traces of the primary nitrogen source and to transport and metabolize alternative nitrogen sources. The utilization process begins when the cell or organism detects nitrogen levels, includes the activation of genes whose products detect, transport or metabolize nitrogen-containing substances, and ends when nitrogen is incorporated into the cell or organism's metabolism.
0022414	name:Name:reproductive process	info:Definition:A biological process that directly contributes to the process of producing new individuals by one or two organisms. The new individuals inherit some proportion of their genetic material from the parent or parents.
0003006	name:Name:developmental process involved in reproduction	name:Synonym:reproductive developmental process	info:Definition:A developmental process in which a progressive change in the state of some part of an organism specifically contributes to its ability to form offspring.
0001547	name:Name:antral ovarian follicle growth	info:Definition:Increase in size of antral follicles due to cell proliferation and/or growth of the antral cavity.
0001880	name:Name:Mullerian duct regression	info:Definition:The process in which the Mullerian ducts, primordia of the oviducts, uterus and upper vagina, undergo regression in male embryos.
0007279	name:Name:pole cell formation	info:Definition:Formation of a small group of cells (pole cells) at the posterior pole of the insect blastula. They are the first cells to cellularize after the arrival of nuclei at the end of the syncytial blastula stage and are the precursors to the insect germ cells.
0007291	name:Name:sperm individualization	info:Definition:The resolution of the male germline syncytium or cyst into individual gametes by packaging each spermatid into its own plasma membrane.
0007293	name:Name:germarium-derived egg chamber formation	info:Definition:Construction of a stage-1 egg chamber in the anterior part of the germarium, from the progeny of germ-line and somatic stem cells. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007295	name:Name:growth of a germarium-derived egg chamber	name:Synonym:egg chamber growth	info:Definition:Growth of the egg chamber between the time it leaves the germarium and the onset of vitellogenesis. During this time both nurse cells and the oocyte undergo developmental changes including nuclear organization and cytoplasmic growth. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007305	name:Name:vitelline membrane formation involved in chorion-containing eggshell formation	name:Synonym:vitelline membrane formation in chorion-containing eggshell	info:Definition:Construction of the vitelline membrane portion of a chorion-containing eggshell. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007309	name:Name:oocyte axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of an axis in the oocyte. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007310	name:Name:oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte dorsal-ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte dorsal/ventral axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte dorsoventral axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the dorsal/ventral axis of the oocyte. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007314	name:Name:oocyte anterior/posterior axis specification	name:Synonym:oocyte anterior/posterior axis determination	info:Definition:Polarization of the oocyte along its anterior-posterior axis. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0060832	name:Name:oocyte animal/vegetal axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the animal/vegetal axis in the oocyte. The animal/vegetal axis of an oocyte is defined by the placement of the nucleus in the oocyte and can sometimes be identified by the asymmetric placement of other substances such as yolk in the oocyte. The pole of the egg that is closest to the nucleus defines the animal end, with the axis passing through the nucleus.
0007506	name:Name:gonadal mesoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the gonadal mesoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The gonadal mesoderm is the middle layer of the three primary germ layers of the embryo which will go on to form the gonads of the organism.
0007530	name:Name:sex determination	info:Definition:Any process that establishes and transmits the specification of sexual status of an individual organism.
0007538	name:Name:primary sex determination	info:Definition:The sex determination process that results in the initial specification of sexual status of an individual organism.
0007545	name:Name:processes downstream of sex determination signal	info:Definition:The sex determination processes that take place after the initial transmission of the sexual phenotype to specific information pathways.
0018992	name:Name:germ-line sex determination	info:Definition:The determination of sex and sexual phenotype in an organism's germ line.
0018993	name:Name:somatic sex determination	info:Definition:The determination of sex and sexual phenotypes in an organism's soma.
0030237	name:Name:female sex determination	info:Definition:The specification of female sex of an individual organism.
0030238	name:Name:male sex determination	info:Definition:The specification of male sex of an individual organism.
0007540	name:Name:sex determination, establishment of X:A ratio	info:Definition:The developmental process in which an organism senses the number of X chromosomes and autosomes in its genomic complement and responds to it.
0007541	name:Name:sex determination, primary response to X:A ratio	info:Definition:The developmental process in which an organism interprets its X to autosomal chromosomal complement.
0007548	name:Name:sex differentiation	info:Definition:The establishment of the sex of an organism by physical differentiation.
0046660	name:Name:female sex differentiation	info:Definition:The establishment of the sex of a female organism by physical differentiation.
0046661	name:Name:male sex differentiation	info:Definition:The establishment of the sex of a male organism by physical differentiation.
0009793	name:Name:embryo development ending in seed dormancy	name:Synonym:embryogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryo over time, from zygote formation to the end of seed dormancy. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010262	name:Name:somatic embryogenesis	info:Definition:Initiation of a somatic embryo-an embryo arising from previously differentiated somatic cells, rather than from fused haploid gametes.
0048825	name:Name:cotyledon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cotyledon over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cotyledon is the modified leaf (seed leaf), found as part of the embryo in plant seeds. It is involved in either storage or absorption of food reserves. Dicotyledonous seeds contain two cotyledons, while monocotyledonous seeds contain only one. The cotyledons may appear above ground and show photosynthetic activity in the seedling.
0009835	name:Name:ripening	info:Definition:The series of events causing changes in one or more characteristics of a fruit (color, aroma, flavor, texture, hardness, cell wall structure) to make it more attractive to animals and/or aid in seed dispersal.
0009836	name:Name:ripening, climacteric	info:Definition:A ripening process that involves a burst of respiration and ethylene (ethene) evolution at the onset.
0009837	name:Name:ripening, non-climacteric	info:Definition:A ripening process that does not involve a respiratory burst.
0009942	name:Name:longitudinal axis specification	name:Synonym:apical-basal pattern specification	name:Synonym:longitudinal axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the longitudinal axis. In plants, this is the axis that runs from the shoot to the root.
0009960	name:Name:endosperm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the endosperm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The endosperm is formed during fertilization and provides nutrients to the developing embryo.
0010071	name:Name:root meristem specification	info:Definition:The specification of a meristem which will give rise to a primary or lateral root.
0010072	name:Name:primary shoot apical meristem specification	info:Definition:The specification of the meristem which will give rise to all post-embryonic above-ground structures of the plant as well as the non-root below-ground structures, such as rhizomes and tubers.
0010093	name:Name:specification of floral organ identity	info:Definition:The process in which the identity of a floral organ primordium is specified. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010094	name:Name:specification of carpel identity	info:Definition:The process in which a floral organ primordium acquires the carpel identity. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010095	name:Name:specification of petal identity	info:Definition:The process in which a floral organ primordium acquires petal identity. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010096	name:Name:specification of sepal identity	info:Definition:The process in which a floral organ primordium acquires sepal identity. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010097	name:Name:specification of stamen identity	info:Definition:The process in which a floral organ primordium acquires stamen or staminode identity. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010162	name:Name:seed dormancy	info:Definition:The process in which a dormant state is induced, maintained and broken in a seed. Dormancy is characterized by a suspension of physiological activity that can be reactivated.
0010214	name:Name:seed coat development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the seed coat over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0010227	name:Name:floral organ abscission	info:Definition:The controlled shedding of floral organs.
0010228	name:Name:vegetative to reproductive phase transition of meristem	name:Synonym:floral evocation	name:Synonym:flowering	name:Synonym:transition from vegetative to reproductive phase	info:Definition:The process involved in transforming a meristem that produces vegetative structures, such as leaves, into a meristem that produces reproductive structures, such as a flower or an inflorescence.
0010231	name:Name:maintenance of seed dormancy	info:Definition:Any process that maintains a seed in a dormant state.
0010254	name:Name:nectary development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the floral nectaries over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0010450	name:Name:inflorescence meristem growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an inflorescence meristem, a population of undifferentiated cells in a plant shoot which produces small leaves and then floral meristems, which will give rise to flowers.
0010451	name:Name:floral meristem growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a floral meristem, a population of undifferentiated cells in a plant that gives rise to a flower.
0010582	name:Name:floral meristem determinacy	info:Definition:The process in which a floral meristem becomes determinate (i.e. ceases to produce lateral organs and may or may not terminally differentiate).
0010622	name:Name:specification of ovule identity	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the identity of an ovule is specified. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0022601	name:Name:menstrual cycle phase	info:Definition:The progression of physiological phases, occurring in the endometrium during the menstrual cycle that recur at regular intervals during the reproductive years. The menstrual cycle is an ovulation cycle where the endometrium is shed if pregnancy does not occur.
0042696	name:Name:menarche	info:Definition:The beginning of the menstrual cycle; the first menstrual cycle in an individual.
0042697	name:Name:menopause	info:Definition:Cessation of menstruation, occurring in (e.g.) the human female usually around the age of 50.
0042703	name:Name:menstruation	info:Definition:The cyclic, physiologic discharge through the vagina of blood and endometrial tissues from the nonpregnant uterus.
0030381	name:Name:chorion-containing eggshell pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that gives rise to the structural pattern of a chorion-containing eggshell such as those found in insects.
0030703	name:Name:eggshell formation	info:Definition:Construction of the eggshell, a product of the somatic follicle cell epithelium and a structure that supports the egg in a hostile environment, minimizing water loss whilst allowing gas exchanges essential for embryonic respiration.
0007304	name:Name:chorion-containing eggshell formation	name:Synonym:eggshell formation	info:Definition:The construction of a chorion-containing eggshell. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0031150	name:Name:sorocarp stalk development	name:Synonym:sorophore development	name:Synonym:stalk development	name:Synonym:stalk formation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the sorocarp stalk over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The sorocarp stalk is a tubular structure that consists of cellulose-covered cells stacked on top of each other and surrounded by an acellular stalk tube composed of cellulose and glycoprotein. An example of this process is found in Dictyostelium discoideum.
0031152	name:Name:aggregation involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:aggregate development involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:aggregation during fruiting body development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the aggregate over time, from its formation to the point when a slug is formed. Aggregate development begins in response to starvation and continues by the chemoattractant-mediated movement of cells toward each other. The aggregate is a multicellular structure that gives rise to the slug.
0031153	name:Name:slug development involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:migratory slug development during sorocarp development	name:Synonym:pseudoplasmodium biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pseudoplasmodium formation	name:Synonym:slug development during fruiting body development	name:Synonym:slug development during sorocarp development	name:Synonym:standing slug development during sorocarp development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the slug over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Slug development begins when the aggregate rises upwards to form a finger-shaped structure and ends when culmination begins. Slug development begins after aggregation and ends before culmination in sorocarp development.
0031154	name:Name:culmination involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:culminant development	name:Synonym:culmination during fruiting body development	name:Synonym:culmination during sorocarp development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the culminant over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Culmination begins with a morphogenetic change of the finger-like or migratory slug giving rise to an organized structure containing a stalk and a sorus. This process is the final stage of sorocarp development.
0031288	name:Name:sorocarp morphogenesis	name:Synonym:fruiting body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the sorocarp is generated and organized. An example of this process is found in Dictyostelium discoideum.
0035112	name:Name:genitalia morphogenesis	name:Synonym:genital morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of genitalia are generated and organized. The genitalia are the organs of reproduction or generation, external and internal.
0030538	name:Name:embryonic genitalia morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic genital morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the embryo, by which the anatomical structures of the genitalia are generated and organized.
0035126	name:Name:post-embryonic genitalia morphogenesis	name:Synonym:post-embryonic genital morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring after embryonic development, by which the anatomical structures of the genitalia are generated and organized.
0035260	name:Name:internal genitalia morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the internal genitalia are generated and organized. The internal genitalia are the internal sex organs such as the uterine tube, the uterus and the vagina in female mammals, and the testis, seminal vesicle, ejaculatory duct and prostate in male mammals.
0035261	name:Name:external genitalia morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the external genitalia are generated and organized. The external genitalia are the outer sex organs, such as the penis or vulva in mammals.
0048807	name:Name:female genitalia morphogenesis	name:Synonym:female genital morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of female genitalia are generated and organized.
0048808	name:Name:male genitalia morphogenesis	name:Synonym:male genital morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of male genitalia are generated and organized.
0048815	name:Name:hermaphrodite genitalia morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of hermaphrodite genitalia are generated and organized.
0035262	name:Name:gonad morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the gonads are generated and organized. A gonad is an animal organ producing gametes, e.g. the testes or the ovary in mammals.
0061040	name:Name:ovum-producing ovary morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which an ovum-producing ovary is generated and organized.
0035263	name:Name:genital disc sexually dimorphic development	info:Definition:The sex-specific patterns of primoridia growth and differentiation in the genital imaginal disc. The anal primordium of the genital disc develops in both sexes, but depending on the genetic sex gives rise to either male or female analia. Depending on the genetic sex, only one of the two genital primordia develop. In females the female genital primordium develops and gives rise to the female genitalia whereas the male primordium is repressed. Conversely, in males the male genital primordium develops and gives rise to the male genitalia whereas the female genital primordium is repressed.
0035846	name:Name:oviduct epithelium development	name:Synonym:fallopian tube epithelium development	info:Definition:The progression of the oviduct epithelium over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. An oviduct is a tube through which an ova passes from the ovary to the uterus, or from the ovary to the outside of the organism. The oviduct epithelium is the specialized epithelium that lines the oviduct.
0035847	name:Name:uterine epithelium development	name:Synonym:uterus epithelial development	info:Definition:The progression of an epithelium of the uterus over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. An epithelium is a tissue that covers the internal or external surfaces of an anatomical structure.
0045136	name:Name:development of secondary sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the secondary sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structures. In humans, these include growth of axillary, chest, and pubic hair, voice changes, testicular/penile enlargement, breast development and menstrual periods. Development occurs in response to sex hormone secretion.
0046543	name:Name:development of secondary female sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the secondary female sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structures. In female humans, these include growth of axillary and pubic hair, breast development and menstrual periods. Their development occurs in response to sex hormone secretion.
0046544	name:Name:development of secondary male sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the secondary male sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structures. In male humans, these include growth of axillary, chest, and pubic hair, voice changes, and testicular/penile enlargement. Development occurs in response to sex hormone secretion.
0045137	name:Name:development of primary sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the primary sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structures. The primary sexual characteristics are the testes in males and the ovaries in females and they develop in response to sex hormone secretion.
0046545	name:Name:development of primary female sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the primary female sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structure. The primary female sexual characteristics are the ovaries, and they develop in response to sex hormone secretion.
0046546	name:Name:development of primary male sexual characteristics	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the primary male sexual characteristics over time, from their formation to the mature structures. The primary male sexual characteristics are the testes, and they develop in response to sex hormone secretion.
0046697	name:Name:decidualization	name:Synonym:decidual cell reaction	info:Definition:The cellular and vascular changes occurring in the endometrium of the pregnant uterus just after the onset of blastocyst implantation. This process involves the proliferation and differentiation of the fibroblast-like endometrial stromal cells into large, polyploid decidual cells that eventually form the maternal component of the placenta.
0046797	name:Name:viral procapsid maturation	info:Definition:The period of virion development during which the capsid components form the immature capsid and encapsulate the viral genome; the capsid often undergoes a number of structural alterations during this period.
0046843	name:Name:dorsal appendage formation	info:Definition:Establishment of the dorsal filaments, elaborate specializations of the chorion that protrude from the anterior end of the egg and facilitate embryonic respiration.
0046844	name:Name:micropyle formation	info:Definition:Establishment of the micropyle, a single cone-shaped specialization of the chorion that allows sperm entry into the egg prior to fertilization.
0048071	name:Name:sex-specific pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in one sex that is not observed in the other sex.
0048094	name:Name:male pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in males.
0048095	name:Name:female pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in females.
0048138	name:Name:germ-line cyst encapsulation	info:Definition:Formation of a single follicular epithelium around the germ-line derived cells of a cyst.
0048139	name:Name:female germ-line cyst encapsulation	info:Definition:Formation of a single follicular epithelium around the germ-line derived cells of a cyst formed in the female gonad.
0048140	name:Name:male germ-line cyst encapsulation	info:Definition:Formation of a single follicular epithelium around the germ-line derived cells of a cyst formed in the male gonad.
0048281	name:Name:inflorescence morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of inflorescences are generated and organized. An inflorescence is the part of a seed plant body that is usually above ground and that can bear flowers.
0048282	name:Name:determinate inflorescence morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of determinate inflorescences are generated and organized. A determinate inflorescence is one that can only produce a predetermined number of floral meristems.
0048283	name:Name:indeterminate inflorescence morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of determinate inflorescences are generated and organized. A determinate inflorescence is one that can produce an undefined number of floral meristems.
0048317	name:Name:seed morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the seed are generated and organized.
0048437	name:Name:floral organ development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the floral organ over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048440	name:Name:carpel development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the carpel over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A carpel is an organ (generally believed to be a modified foliar unit) at the centre of a flower, bearing one or more ovules and having its margins fused together or with other carpels to enclose the ovule in an ovary, and consisting also of a stigma and usually a style.
0048441	name:Name:petal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the petal over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048442	name:Name:sepal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the sepal over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048443	name:Name:stamen development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stamen over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048438	name:Name:floral whorl development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a floral whorl over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A floral whorl is a circular arrangement of parts of a flower arising from a stem of a plant.
0048464	name:Name:flower calyx development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the flower calyx over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048465	name:Name:corolla development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the corolla over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048466	name:Name:androecium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the androecium over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048467	name:Name:gynoecium development	name:Synonym:pistil development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the gynoecium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The gynoecium is the collective name for the carpels of a flower.
0048439	name:Name:flower morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the flower are generated and organized.
0048444	name:Name:floral organ morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the floral organ are generated and organized.
0048445	name:Name:carpel morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the carpel are generated and organized.
0048446	name:Name:petal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the petal are generated and organized.
0048447	name:Name:sepal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the sepal are generated and organized.
0048448	name:Name:stamen morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the stamen are generated and organized.
0048450	name:Name:floral organ structural organization	name:Synonym:floral organ structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of floral organs. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048654	name:Name:anther morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the anther are generated and organized.
0048449	name:Name:floral organ formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to floral organs. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048451	name:Name:petal formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the petal. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048453	name:Name:sepal formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the sepal. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048455	name:Name:stamen formation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of giving rise to the stamen. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048462	name:Name:carpel formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the carpel. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048457	name:Name:floral whorl morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the floral whorl are generated and organized.
0048458	name:Name:floral whorl formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the floral whorl. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048459	name:Name:floral whorl structural organization	name:Synonym:floral whorl structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the floral whorl. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048460	name:Name:flower formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the flower. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048461	name:Name:flower structural organization	name:Synonym:flower structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the flower. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048479	name:Name:style development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the style over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The style is an elongated part of a carpel, or group of fused carpels, and it lies between the ovary and the stigma.
0048480	name:Name:stigma development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stigma over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The stigma is the pollen-receptive surface of a carpel or group of fused carpels, usually sticky.
0048481	name:Name:ovule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ovule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ovule is the structure in seed plants enclosing the female gametophyte, and is composed of the nucellus, one or two integuments, and the funiculus; it develops into the seed.
0048482	name:Name:ovule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the ovule are generated and organized. The ovule is the structure in seed plants enclosing the female gametophyte, and is composed of the nucellus, one or two integuments, and the funiculus; it develops into the seed.
0048508	name:Name:embryonic meristem development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryonic meristem over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0010065	name:Name:primary meristem tissue development	name:Synonym:primary meristem histogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the primary meristem over time, from formation to the mature structure, as it occurs during plant embryogenesis. The primary meristem tissue is the protoderm, ground meristem and procambium.
0048530	name:Name:fruit morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a fruit are generated and organized. A fruit is a reproductive body of a seed plant.
0048559	name:Name:establishment of floral organ orientation	info:Definition:The process that determines the orientation of the floral organs with reference to the central axis of the flower.
0048498	name:Name:establishment of petal orientation	info:Definition:The process that determines the orientation of petals with reference to the central axis.
0048608	name:Name:reproductive structure development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of structures that will be used in the process of creating new individuals from one or more parents, from their formation to the mature structures.
0008406	name:Name:gonad development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the gonad over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The gonad is an animal organ that produces gametes; in some species it also produces hormones.
0009908	name:Name:flower development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the flower over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The flower is the reproductive structure in a plant, and its development begins with the transition of the vegetative or inflorescence meristem into a floral meristem.
0010154	name:Name:fruit development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fruit over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The fruit is a reproductive body of a seed plant.
0010229	name:Name:inflorescence development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an inflorescence over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0030850	name:Name:prostate gland development	name:Synonym:prostate development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the prostate gland over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The prostate gland is a partly muscular, partly glandular body that is situated near the base of the mammalian male urethra and secretes an alkaline viscid fluid which is a major constituent of the ejaculatory fluid.
0035670	name:Name:ovule-producing ovary development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an ovary that produces an ovule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ovary is the enlarged basal portion of a carpel and matures into a fruit. An ovule is the multicellular structure that gives rise to and contains the female reproductive cells, and develops into a seed.
0048316	name:Name:seed development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the seed over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A seed is a propagating organ formed in the sexual reproductive cycle of gymnosperms and angiosperms, consisting of a protective coat enclosing an embryo and food reserves.
0048837	name:Name:sorus development	name:Synonym:sorus biosynthesis	name:Synonym:sorus formation	name:Synonym:spore head biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spore head formation	name:Synonym:spore head morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the sorus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A sorus is a mass of spores.
0060065	name:Name:uterus development	name:Synonym:Mullerian tract development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of the uterus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0060066	name:Name:oviduct development	name:Synonym:fallopian tube development	name:Synonym:Mullerian tract development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of an oviduct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An oviduct is a tube through which an ova passes from the ovary to the uterus, or from the ovary to the outside of the organism.
0060067	name:Name:cervix development	name:Synonym:Mullerian tract development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cervix over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0060068	name:Name:vagina development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of the vagina over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0061107	name:Name:seminal vesicle development	info:Definition:The progression of the seminal vesicle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The seminal vesicle is a gland that contributes to the production of semen.
0072520	name:Name:seminiferous tubule development	info:Definition:The reproductive developmental process whose specific outcome is the progression of the seminiferous tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Seminiferous tubules are ducts located in the testicles, and are the specific location of meiosis, and the subsequent creation of gametes, namely spermatozoa.
0075259	name:Name:spore-bearing organ development	name:Synonym:fruiting structure development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a spore-bearing organ over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A spore-bearing organ is an anatomical structure that produces new spores.
0048653	name:Name:anther development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anther over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048655	name:Name:tapetal layer morphogenesis	name:Synonym:differentiation of tapetal layer	name:Synonym:tapetum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the tapetal layer are generated and organized. The tapetum is a layer of cells that provides a source of nutrition for the pollen grains as they mature.
0048656	name:Name:tapetal layer formation	name:Synonym:tapetum formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the tapetal layer. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The tapetum is a layer of cells that provides a source of nutrition for the pollen grains as they mature.
0048658	name:Name:tapetal layer development	name:Synonym:tapetum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the tapetal layer over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048700	name:Name:acquisition of desiccation tolerance	info:Definition:The process in which a seed acquires tolerance to severe drying, before entering into a dry, either dormant or quiescent state.
0048806	name:Name:genitalia development	name:Synonym:genital development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the genitalia over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007484	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived genitalia development	name:Synonym:genital development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the genitalia over time, from formation as part of the genital disc to the mature structure. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030539	name:Name:male genitalia development	name:Synonym:male genital development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the male genitalia over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0030540	name:Name:female genitalia development	name:Synonym:female genital development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the female genitalia over time, from formation to the mature structure.
0040035	name:Name:hermaphrodite genitalia development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hermaphrodite genitalia over time, from formation to the mature structures.
0048826	name:Name:cotyledon morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the cotyledon are generated and organized. The cotyledon is the modified leaf (seed leaf), found as part of the embryo in plant seeds. It is involved in either storage or absorption of food reserves. Dicotyledonous seeds contain two cotyledons, while monocotyledonous seeds contain only one. The cotyledons may appear above ground and show photosynthetic activity in the seedling.
0048833	name:Name:specification of floral organ number	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the number of floral organs formed in a floral whorl.
0048834	name:Name:specification of petal number	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the number of petals formed in a flower.
0048838	name:Name:release of seed from dormancy	info:Definition:The process in which the dormant state is broken in a seed. Dormancy is characterized by a suspension of physiological activity that can be reactivated upon release.
0048868	name:Name:pollen tube development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pollen tube over time, from its initial formation to a mature structure.
0060512	name:Name:prostate gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a prostate gland are generated and organized.
0060515	name:Name:prostate field specification	info:Definition:The process that results in the delineation of a specific region of the urogenital sinus epithelium into the area in which the prostate gland will develop.
0060524	name:Name:dichotomous subdivision of prostate epithelial cord terminal unit	name:Synonym:prostate epithelial cord bifurcation	info:Definition:The process in which a prostate epithelial cord bifurcates at its end.
0060525	name:Name:prostate glandular acinus development	info:Definition:The progression of a glandular acinus of the prostate gland over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The glandular acini are the saclike structures of the gland.
0060736	name:Name:prostate gland growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of the prostate gland where the increase in size or mass has the specific outcome of the progression of the gland, from its formation to its mature state.
0060737	name:Name:prostate gland morphogenetic growth	name:Synonym:prostate gland growth involved in morphogenesis	info:Definition:The differential increase in size or mass of the prostate gland that contributes to the gland attaining its form.
0060740	name:Name:prostate gland epithelium morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of epithelia of the prostate gland are generated and organized. An epithelium consists of closely packed cells arranged in one or more layers, that covers the outer surfaces of the body or lines any internal cavity or tube.
0060442	name:Name:branching involved in prostate gland morphogenesis	name:Synonym:prostate branching	name:Synonym:prostate gland branching morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the prostate gland is generated and organized. A branch is a division or offshoot from a main stem.
0060513	name:Name:prostatic bud formation	name:Synonym:primary prostate bud formation	name:Synonym:prostate ductal budding	name:Synonym:prostate gland formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which a region of the fetal urogenital sinus epithelium is specified to become the prostate, resulting in prostate bud outgrowth.
0060516	name:Name:primary prostatic bud elongation	name:Synonym:prostate bud elongation	name:Synonym:prostate bud elongation involved in prostate morphogenesis	info:Definition:The increase in size of the prostatic bud as it forms.
0060523	name:Name:prostate epithelial cord elongation	info:Definition:The developmental growth process in which solid chords of prostate epithelium increase in length.
0060526	name:Name:prostate glandular acinus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the prostate glandular acini are generated and organized. The glandular acini are the saclike structures of the gland.
0060741	name:Name:prostate gland stromal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the prostate gland stroma is generated and organized. The prostate gland stroma is made up of the mesenchymal or fibroblast cells of the prostate gland.
0060744	name:Name:mammary gland branching involved in thelarche	name:Synonym:mammary gland branching involved in puberty	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the mammary gland duct is generated and organized during the period of sexual maturity in mammals. The mammary gland is a large compound sebaceous gland that in female mammals is modified to secrete milk.
0060745	name:Name:mammary gland branching involved in pregnancy	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the mammary gland duct is generated and organized as a part of pregnancy.
0060748	name:Name:tertiary branching involved in mammary gland duct morphogenesis	info:Definition:The branching process in which the mammary gland ducts form tertiary branches off of the secondary branches as part of diestrus and pregnancy.
0061038	name:Name:uterus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures of the uterus are generated and organized.
0061108	name:Name:seminal vesicle epithelium development	info:Definition:The progression of the seminal vesicle epithelium over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0061205	name:Name:paramesonephric duct development	name:Synonym:Mullerian duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the paramesonephric duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Mullerian ducts (or paramesonephric ducts) are paired ducts of the embryo that run down the lateral sides of the urogenital ridge and terminate at the mullerian eminence in the primitive urogenital sinus. In the female, they will develop to form the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and the upper portion of the vagina; in the male, they are lost. These ducts are made of tissue of mesodermal origin.
0070788	name:Name:conidiophore stalk development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the conidiophore stalk over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The conidiophore stalk is part of a specialized hypha that extends aerially from the growth substrate and supports structures from which conidia, or asexual spores, develop.
0080060	name:Name:integument development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the integument over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Integument is one of the layers of tissue that usually covers the ovule, enveloping the nucellus and forming the micropyle at the apex.
0080086	name:Name:stamen filament development	name:Synonym:filament development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the filament over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Filament is the stalk of a stamen.
0080126	name:Name:ovary septum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ovary septum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ovary septum is the thin partition that divides the ovary, the basal portion of a carpel or group of fused carpels, that encloses the ovule(s).
0080127	name:Name:fruit septum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fruit septum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The fruit septum is a thin partition or membrane that divides a cavity or a mass of tissue in the fruit.
0080128	name:Name:anther septum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anther septum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The anther septum is a thin partition or stretch of cells that are present in the anther dehiscence zone.
0007565	name:Name:female pregnancy	name:Synonym:carrying of young	name:Synonym:gestation	info:Definition:The set of physiological processes that allow an embryo or foetus to develop within the body of a female animal. It covers the time from fertilization of a female ovum by a male spermatozoon until birth.
0007566	name:Name:embryo implantation	name:Synonym:blastocyst implantation	info:Definition:Attachment of the blastocyst to the uterine lining.
0007567	name:Name:parturition	name:Synonym:egg laying	name:Synonym:giving birth	info:Definition:The reproductive process in which the parent is separated from its offspring either by giving birth to live young or by laying eggs.
0007618	name:Name:mating	info:Definition:The pairwise union of individuals for the purpose of sexual reproduction, ultimately resulting in the formation of zygotes.
0007620	name:Name:copulation	info:Definition:The act of sexual union between male and female, involving the transfer of sperm.
0009566	name:Name:fertilization	info:Definition:The union of gametes of opposite sexes during the process of sexual reproduction to form a zygote. It involves the fusion of the gametic nuclei (karyogamy) and cytoplasm (plasmogamy).
0007338	name:Name:single fertilization	name:Synonym:zygote biosynthesis	name:Synonym:zygote formation	info:Definition:The union of male and female gametes to form a zygote.
0009567	name:Name:double fertilization forming a zygote and endosperm	name:Synonym:double fertilization	info:Definition:Fertilization where one of the two sperm nuclei from the pollen tube fuses with the egg nucleus to form a 2n zygote, and the other fuses with the two polar nuclei to form the 3n primary endosperm nucleus and then develops into the endosperm. The ploidy level of the 2n zygote and 3n primary endosperm nucleus is determined by the ploidy level of the parents involved. An example of this component is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0009677	name:Name:double fertilization forming two zygotes	info:Definition:Rudimentary double fertilization where one of the two sperm nuclei from the pollen tube fuses with the egg nucleus to form a 2n zygote, and the other fuses with the ventral canal cell nucleus to form a second zygote, which soon degenerates. An example of this process is found in the Gnetophytes, such as Welwitschia mirabilis.
0009856	name:Name:pollination	info:Definition:The cascade of biological processes occurring in plants beginning when the pollen lands on the stigma and continuing up to, but not including, fertilization, as defined by sperm-central cell fusion.
0019098	name:Name:reproductive behavior	name:Synonym:reproductive behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that are associated with reproduction.
0007617	name:Name:mating behavior	name:Synonym:mating behaviour	info:Definition:The behavioral interactions between organisms for the purpose of mating, or sexual reproduction resulting in the formation of zygotes.
0007619	name:Name:courtship behavior	name:Synonym:courtship behaviour	info:Definition:The behavioral interactions between organisms for the purpose of attracting sexual partners.
0035648	name:Name:circadian mating behavior	name:Synonym:circadian mating behaviour	name:Synonym:circadian mating rhythm	info:Definition:The fluctuation in mating behavior that occurs over an approximately 24 hour cycle.
0048047	name:Name:mating behavior, sex discrimination	name:Synonym:mating behaviour, sex discrimination	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of individuals for the purpose of discriminating between the sexes, for the purpose of finding a suitable mating partner.
0033057	name:Name:multicellular organismal reproductive behavior	name:Synonym:reproductive behavior in a multicellular organism	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that are associated with reproduction in a multicellular organism.
0018991	name:Name:oviposition	name:Synonym:egg laying	name:Synonym:egg-laying	info:Definition:The deposition of eggs (either fertilized or not) upon a surface or into a medium such as water.
0060179	name:Name:male mating behavior	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of a male organism that are associated with reproduction.
0060180	name:Name:female mating behavior	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of a female organism that are associated with reproduction.
0060746	name:Name:parental behavior	info:Definition:A reproductive behavior in which a parent cares for and rears offspring.
0045297	name:Name:post-mating behavior	name:Synonym:post-mating behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism following mating.
0042628	name:Name:mating plug formation	name:Synonym:copulatory plug biosynthesis	name:Synonym:copulatory plug deposition	name:Synonym:copulatory plug formation	name:Synonym:mating plug deposition	info:Definition:The deposition of a plug of sperm or other gelatinous material into the opening of the vulva by a male at the termination of copulation. Probably acts to prevent subsequent matings by other males.
0046008	name:Name:regulation of female receptivity, post-mating	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the receptiveness of a female to male advances subsequent to mating.
0060403	name:Name:post-mating oviposition	info:Definition:The deposition of eggs, either fertilized or not, upon a surface or into a medium, following mating.
0022415	name:Name:viral reproductive process	name:Synonym:viral life cycle process	info:Definition:A reproductive process involved in viral reproduction. Usually, this is by infection of a host cell, replication of the viral genome, and assembly of progeny virus particles. In some cases the viral genetic material may integrate into the host genome and only subsequently, under particular circumstances, 'complete' its life cycle.
0019042	name:Name:latent virus infection	info:Definition:A viral process characterized by (a) the lack of efficient expression of all the viral genes that are transcribed during productive infection, and (b) the activation of a unique latent transcriptional progam.
0019043	name:Name:establishment of viral latency	name:Synonym:lysogenic commitment	info:Definition:The process in which a virus reaches a latent state.
0019044	name:Name:latent virus maintenance	info:Definition:Any process required for maintaining the latent form of the viral genome within a cell.
0019045	name:Name:latent virus replication	info:Definition:Any process required for latent viral replication in a cell.
0019046	name:Name:reactivation of latent virus	info:Definition:The reactivation of a virus from a latent to a lytic state.
0019048	name:Name:virus-host interaction	name:Synonym:viral interaction with host	info:Definition:Interactions, directly with the host cell macromolecular machinery, to allow virus replication.
0006948	name:Name:induction by virus of host cell-cell fusion	name:Synonym:induction by virus of cell-cell fusion in host	name:Synonym:viral-induced cell-cell fusion	name:Synonym:viral-induced host cell-cell fusion	name:Synonym:viral-induced membrane fusion	info:Definition:The process of syncytia-forming cell-cell fusion, caused by a virus.
0019049	name:Name:evasion of host defenses by virus	name:Synonym:viral host defence evasion	name:Synonym:viral host defense evasion	info:Definition:Any process, either active or passive, by which a virus avoids or tolerates the effects of its host organism's defense(s). Host defenses may be induced by the presence of the virus or may be preformed (e.g. physical barriers). The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0019054	name:Name:modulation by virus of host cellular process	name:Synonym:modification by virus of host cellular process	name:Synonym:modulation of cellular process in host by virus	name:Synonym:regulation by virus of host cellular process	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular process in host by virus	name:Synonym:regulation of host cellular process by virus	name:Synonym:viral host cell process manipulation	info:Definition:The process in which a virus effects a change in the cellular pathways and activities of its host organism.
0019087	name:Name:transformation of host cell by virus	name:Synonym:viral transformation	name:Synonym:viral transformation of host cell	info:Definition:Any virus-induced change in the morphological, biochemical, or growth parameters of a cell.
0039506	name:Name:modulation by virus of host molecular function	name:Synonym:modification by virus of host protein function	info:Definition:The process in which a virus effects a change in the function of a host protein via a direct interaction.
0046719	name:Name:regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:regulation of viral protein levels	info:Definition:Any virus-mediated process that modulates the levels of viral proteins in a cell.
0046730	name:Name:induction of host immune response by virus	name:Synonym:activation of host immune response by virus	info:Definition:The induction by a virus of an immune response in the host organism.
0046739	name:Name:spread of virus in host	name:Synonym:spread of virus within host	name:Synonym:viral spread within host	info:Definition:The dissemination of infectious virion particles within an infected host organism.
0046784	name:Name:intronless viral mRNA export from host nucleus	name:Synonym:intronless viral mRNA export from host cell nucleus	name:Synonym:intronless viral mRNA export out of nucleus	name:Synonym:intronless viral mRNA transport from nucleus to cytoplasm	name:Synonym:intronless viral mRNA-nucleus export	info:Definition:The directed movement of intronless viral mRNA from the host nucleus to the cytoplasm for translation.
0046794	name:Name:virion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a virion into, out of, or within a host cell.
0046796	name:Name:viral genome transport in host cell	info:Definition:The directed movement of the viral genome(s) within a host cell.
0060139	name:Name:positive regulation of apoptosis by virus	info:Definition:Any viral process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cell death by apoptosis.
0019058	name:Name:viral infectious cycle	name:Synonym:lytic viral life cycle	info:Definition:A set of processes which all viruses follow to ensure survival; includes attachment and entry of the virus particle, decoding of genome information, translation of viral mRNA by host ribosomes, genome replication, and assembly and release of viral particles containing the genome.
0019059	name:Name:initiation of viral infection	info:Definition:The set of processes involved in the start of virus infection of cells.
0019060	name:Name:intracellular transport of viral proteins in host cell	name:Synonym:intracellular viral protein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of viral proteins within the host cell.
0046801	name:Name:intracellular transport of viral capsid in host cell	name:Synonym:intracellular viral capsid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of viral capsid proteins within the host cell.
0019061	name:Name:uncoating of virus	name:Synonym:viral uncoating	info:Definition:A general term applied to the events that occur after penetration; refers to the 'uncoating' of the viral genome from the nucleocapsid core.
0019062	name:Name:virion attachment to host cell surface receptor	name:Synonym:virion attachment	info:Definition:Any process involved in the specific binding of a viral antireceptor to a cell surface receptor.
0019063	name:Name:virion penetration into host cell	name:Synonym:virion penetration	info:Definition:Any process required for the introduction of virus particles into the cell.
0019064	name:Name:viral envelope fusion with host membrane	name:Synonym:viral envelope fusion	name:Synonym:viral envelope fusion with host cell membrane	name:Synonym:viral envelope fusion with host plasma membrane	name:Synonym:viral-cell fusion molecule activity	info:Definition:A form of viral penetration which involves the fusion of the virion envelope with the cellular membrane.
0019066	name:Name:translocation of virus into host cell	name:Synonym:viral translocation	info:Definition:The translocation of an entire virus particle across the host cell plasma membrane.
0019067	name:Name:viral assembly, maturation, egress, and release	info:Definition:Any process involved in the assembly, maturation, egress, and release of progeny virions.
0046763	name:Name:virus budding from Golgi membrane	name:Synonym:Golgi membrane viral budding	name:Synonym:viral budding from Golgi membrane	info:Definition:The evagination of the nucleocapsid from the host Golgi membrane system, resulting in envelopment of the virus.
0046764	name:Name:virus budding from ER membrane	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum membrane viral budding	name:Synonym:ER membrane viral budding	name:Synonym:viral budding from ER membrane	info:Definition:The evagination of the nucleocapsid from the host endoplasmic reticulum membrane system, resulting in envelopment of the virus.
0046765	name:Name:virus budding from nuclear membrane	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane viral budding	name:Synonym:viral budding from nuclear membrane	info:Definition:The evagination of the nucleocapsid from the host nuclear membrane system, resulting in envelopment of the virus.
0046766	name:Name:virus budding from plasma membrane	name:Synonym:plasma membrane viral budding	name:Synonym:viral budding from plasma membrane	info:Definition:The evagination of the nucleocapsid from the host plasma membrane system, resulting in envelopment of the virus.
0019070	name:Name:viral genome maturation	info:Definition:Any viral process that occurs on newly synthesized viral genomes.
0019071	name:Name:viral DNA cleavage	info:Definition:The cleavage of viral DNA into singular functional units.
0019072	name:Name:viral genome packaging	info:Definition:The encapsulation of the viral genome within the capsid.
0019074	name:Name:viral RNA genome packaging	info:Definition:The packaging of viral RNA into a nucleocapsid.
0019075	name:Name:virus maturation	name:Synonym:viral maturation	name:Synonym:viral particle maturation	name:Synonym:virus particle maturation	info:Definition:The assembly of the component viral parts into an infectious virion.
0019076	name:Name:release of virus from host	name:Synonym:viral release	info:Definition:The process in which a virus becomes free of a host cell either by the lysis of the host cell or by a non-lytic mechanism.
0019077	name:Name:lytic viral release	name:Synonym:lytic viral life cycle	info:Definition:A viral infection and replication that leads to the destruction (lysis) of the infected cell with the release of virions.
0046753	name:Name:non-lytic viral release	info:Definition:The release of virion particles from the cell that does not result in cell lysis.
0019079	name:Name:viral genome replication	name:Synonym:sigma virus replication	name:Synonym:viral replication	info:Definition:Any process involved directly in viral genome replication, including viral nucleotide metabolism.
0045090	name:Name:retroviral genome replication	info:Definition:Any process involved in the replication of a retroviral genome. Retroviruses use RNA as their nucleic acid and reverse transcriptase to copy their genome into the DNA of the host cells chromosomes.
0019080	name:Name:viral genome expression	info:Definition:The achievement of highly specific, quantitative, temporal and spatial control of virus gene expression within the limited genetic resources of the viral genome.
0019089	name:Name:transmission of virus	name:Synonym:viral transmission	info:Definition:The transfer of virions in order to create new infection.
0044009	name:Name:viral transmission by vector	info:Definition:The transfer of virions by means of an organism (often an insect or other animal) in order to create new infection.
0030069	name:Name:lysogeny	info:Definition:The incorporation of a bacteriophage genome into the genome of its bacterial host organism.
0032359	name:Name:provirus excision	name:Synonym:prophage excision	info:Definition:The molecular events that lead to the excision of a viral genome from the host genome.
0032360	name:Name:provirus maintenance	name:Synonym:prophage maintenance	info:Definition:The molecular events that maintain a viral genome integrated into a host genome.
0046744	name:Name:viral capsid envelopment	info:Definition:The process in which a capsid acquires a membrane envelope.
0046749	name:Name:virus budding from nuclear membrane by viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane viral budding during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from nuclear membrane during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from nuclear membrane during viral capsid envelopment	info:Definition:The envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host nuclear membrane system, thus acquiring a membrane envelope.
0046750	name:Name:virus budding from Golgi membrane by viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:Golgi membrane viral budding during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from Golgi membrane during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from Golgi membrane during viral capsid envelopment	info:Definition:The envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host Golgi membrane system, thus acquiring a membrane envelope.
0046751	name:Name:virus budding from ER membrane by viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum membrane viral budding during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:ER membrane viral budding during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from ER membrane during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from ER membrane during viral capsid envelopment	info:Definition:The envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host endoplasmic reticulum membrane system, thus acquiring a membrane envelope.
0046767	name:Name:virus budding from plasma membrane by viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:plasma membrane viral budding during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from plasma membrane during viral capsid envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from plasma membrane during viral capsid envelopment	info:Definition:The envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host plasma membrane system, thus acquiring a membrane envelope.
0046745	name:Name:viral capsid re-envelopment	info:Definition:The process in which a capsid acquires another membrane envelope, subsequent to acquiring an initial membrane envelope.
0046746	name:Name:virus budding from nuclear membrane by viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:nuclear membrane viral budding during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from nuclear membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from nuclear membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	info:Definition:The re-envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host nuclear membrane system, thus acquiring an additional membrane envelope.
0046747	name:Name:virus budding from Golgi membrane by viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:Golgi membrane viral budding during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from Golgi membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from Golgi membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	info:Definition:The re-envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host Golgi membrane system, thus acquiring an additional membrane envelope.
0046748	name:Name:virus budding from ER membrane by viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:endoplasmic reticulum membrane viral budding during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:ER membrane viral budding during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from ER membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from ER membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	info:Definition:The re-envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host endoplasmic reticulum membrane system, thus acquiring an additional membrane envelope.
0046768	name:Name:virus budding from plasma membrane by viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:plasma membrane viral budding during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:viral budding from plasma membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	name:Synonym:virus budding from plasma membrane during viral capsid re-envelopment	info:Definition:The re-envelopment of a virus, in which the nucleocapsid evaginates from the host plasma membrane system, thus acquiring an additional membrane envelope.
0046752	name:Name:viral capsid precursor localization in host cell nucleus	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of viral capsid precursor localization in nucleus	name:Synonym:localization of viral capsid precursors in nucleus	name:Synonym:nuclear localization of viral capsid precursors	name:Synonym:viral capsid precursor localisation in host cell nucleus	info:Definition:Any process in which viral capsid precursors are transported to, or maintained in, a specific location in the nucleus, thus accumulating the necessary components for assembly of a capsid.
0046786	name:Name:viral replication complex formation and maintenance	info:Definition:The process of organizing and assembling viral replication proteins in preparation for viral replication.
0046788	name:Name:egress of virus within host cell	name:Synonym:movement of virus within host cell	name:Synonym:viral egress	info:Definition:The process of moving the (often) incomplete virion to the cell surface in order to be released from the cell. Egress can involve travel through the endoplasmic reticulum or cytoplasm and will often include final maturation stages of the virion, but it occurs entirely within the cell.
0046799	name:Name:recruitment of helicase-primase complex to DNA lesions	info:Definition:The recruitment of the helicase-primase complex to viral DNA lesions during viral DNA repair.
0046807	name:Name:viral scaffold assembly and maintenance	info:Definition:The assembly and maintenance of the viral scaffold around which the viral capsid is constructed.
0046813	name:Name:virion attachment, binding of host cell surface receptor	info:Definition:The process during virion attachment where a virion binds to a host cell receptor, resulting in a conformational change of the virus protein.
0046814	name:Name:virion attachment, binding of host cell surface coreceptor	info:Definition:The process during virion attachment where a virion binds to a host cell surface receptor after an initial binding event has occurred, resulting in the fusion of the virion and host cell membranes and the initiation of viral entry.
0046815	name:Name:genome retention in viral capsid	info:Definition:Any process in which the viral genome is retained within the capsid during genome cleavage and packaging.
0048609	name:Name:multicellular organismal reproductive process	name:Synonym:organismal reproductive process	name:Synonym:reproductive process in a multicellular organism	info:Definition:The process, occurring above the cellular level, that is pertinent to the reproductive function of a multicellular organism. This includes the integrated processes at the level of tissues and organs.
0007276	name:Name:gamete generation	name:Synonym:gametogenesis	info:Definition:The generation and maintenance of gametes in a multicellular organism. A gamete is a haploid reproductive cell.
0007292	name:Name:female gamete generation	info:Definition:Generation of the female gamete; specialised haploid cells produced by meiosis and along with a male gamete takes part in sexual reproduction.
0048232	name:Name:male gamete generation	info:Definition:Generation of the male gamete; specialised haploid cells produced by meiosis and along with a female gamete takes part in sexual reproduction.
0007320	name:Name:insemination	info:Definition:The introduction of semen or sperm into the genital tract of a female.
0007341	name:Name:penetration of zona pellucida	info:Definition:The infiltration by sperm of the zona pellucida to reach the oocyte. The process involves digestive enzymes from a modified lysosome called the acrosome, situated at the head of the sperm.
0007595	name:Name:lactation	info:Definition:The secretion of milk by the mammary gland.
0009900	name:Name:dehiscence	info:Definition:The opening of an anther, fruit or other structure, which permits the escape of reproductive bodies contained within it.
0009901	name:Name:anther dehiscence	info:Definition:The dehiscence of an anther to release the pollen grains contained within it.
0010047	name:Name:fruit dehiscence	info:Definition:The process leading to the spontaneous opening of the fruit permitting the escape of seeds.
0010431	name:Name:seed maturation	info:Definition:A process in seed development that occurs after embryogenesis by which a quiescent state is established in a seed. Seed maturation is characterized by storage compound accumulation, acquisition of desiccation tolerance, growth arrest and the entry into a dormancy period of variable length that is broken upon germination.
0022605	name:Name:oogenesis stage	name:Synonym:oogenesis process	info:Definition:A reproductive process that is a step in the formation and maturation of an ovum or female gamete from a primordial female germ cell.
0048158	name:Name:oogonium stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 1	info:Definition:The stage in mammalian oogenesis when the primordial germ cell is hardly distinguishable from other cortical cells of the ovary.
0048159	name:Name:primary oocyte stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 2	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when the oocyte has a nucleus slightly larger than those of the adjacent cells and is surrounded by a layer of loose squamous epithelial cells.
0048160	name:Name:primary follicle stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 3	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when a single layer of cuboidal follicle cells surrounds the oocyte. The oocyte nucleus is large.
0048161	name:Name:double layer follicle stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 4	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when a double layer of distinct follicle cells surrounds the oocyte. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0048162	name:Name:multi-layer follicle stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 5	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when many layers of follicle cells surround the oocyte. There is a yolk nucleus (Balbiani's Body) near the germinal vesicle.
0048163	name:Name:scattered antral spaces stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 6	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when antral spaces begin to form in the follicle cells. Mitochondria form centers for yolk concentration.
0048164	name:Name:distinct antral spaces stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 7	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when the antral spaces become distinct and the first polar body forms.
0048165	name:Name:fused antrum stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 8	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when the antral spaces fuse to form a single antral space. The oocyte is suspended in the cumulus oophorous and the first polar body in the perivitelline space.
0048166	name:Name:mature follicle stage	name:Synonym:mammalian oogenesis stage 9	info:Definition:The stage in oogenesis when the antrum is swollen with follicular fluid. The ovum is ready to erupt from the ovary and is arrested at metaphase of the second meiotic division.
0030728	name:Name:ovulation	info:Definition:The release of a mature ovum/oocyte from an ovary.
0001542	name:Name:ovulation from ovarian follicle	info:Definition:The process leading to the rupture of the follicle, releasing the centrally located oocyte into the oviduct. An example of this is found in Mus musculus.
0042698	name:Name:ovulation cycle	name:Synonym:estrous cycle	name:Synonym:menstrual cycle	info:Definition:The type of sexual cycle seen in females, often with physiologic changes in the endometrium that recur at regular intervals during the reproductive years.
0042713	name:Name:sperm ejaculation	info:Definition:The expulsion of seminal fluid, thick white fluid containing spermatozoa, from the male genital tract.
0043084	name:Name:penile erection	info:Definition:The hardening, enlarging and rising of the penis which often occurs in the sexually aroused male and enables sexual intercourse. Achieved by increased inflow of blood into the vessels of erectile tissue, and decreased outflow.
0046692	name:Name:sperm competition	info:Definition:Any process that contributes to the success of sperm fertilization in multiply-mated females.
0007321	name:Name:sperm displacement	info:Definition:The physical displacement of sperm stored from previous mating encounters.
0046693	name:Name:sperm storage	name:Synonym:retention of sperm	name:Synonym:sequestering of sperm	name:Synonym:sequestration of sperm	name:Synonym:sperm retention	name:Synonym:sperm sequestering	name:Synonym:sperm sequestration	name:Synonym:storage of sperm	info:Definition:The retention of sperm by a female following mating.
0046694	name:Name:sperm incapacitation	info:Definition:The process in which the use of stored sperm from the first-mating male is inhibited by the seminal fluid of subsequently mating males.
0060135	name:Name:maternal process involved in female pregnancy	info:Definition:A reproductive process occurring in the mother that allows an embryo or fetus to develop within it.
0060136	name:Name:embryonic process involved in female pregnancy	info:Definition:A reproductive process occurring in the embryo or fetus that allows the embryo or fetus to develop within the mother.
0060137	name:Name:maternal process involved in parturition	info:Definition:A reproductive process occurring in the mother that results in birth.
0060138	name:Name:fetal process involved in parturition	info:Definition:A reproductive process occurring in the embryo that results in birth.
0060378	name:Name:regulation of brood size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the extent of brood size. Brood size is the number of progeny that survive embryogenesis and are cared for at one time.
0070684	name:Name:seminal clot liquefaction	name:Synonym:semen liquefaction	info:Definition:The reproductive process in which coagulated semen becomes liquid following ejaculation, allowing the progressive release of motile spermatozoa.
0080001	name:Name:mucilage extrusion from seed coat	name:Synonym:mucilage release from seed coat	name:Synonym:secretion of mucilage from seed coat	info:Definition:The process in which seed mucilage expands through hydration and breaks the outer cell wall that encapsulates the whole seed upon imbibition. Mucilage, mainly composed of pectins, is formed during seed development and deposited into the apoplast underneath the outer wall of the seed coat.
0022610	name:Name:biological adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a cell or organism to a substrate or other organism.
0022608	name:Name:multicellular organism adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of a multicellular organism to a substrate or other organism.
0022609	name:Name:multicellular organism adhesion to substrate	info:Definition:The attachment of a multicellular organism to a surface or material.
0007594	name:Name:puparial adhesion	name:Synonym:puparial glue	info:Definition:The adhesion of the puparia of Diptera to their substrate; normally effected by a 'glue' secreted by the larval salivary gland and expectorated at the time of pupariation.
0051825	name:Name:adhesion to other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:adhesion to other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The attachment of an organism to a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction. Adhesion may be via adhesion molecules, general stickiness etc., and may be either direct or indirect.
0044406	name:Name:adhesion to host	name:Synonym:host adhesion	info:Definition:The attachment of an organism to its host via adhesion molecules, general stickiness etc., either directly or indirectly. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0020035	name:Name:cytoadherence to microvasculature, mediated by symbiont protein	name:Synonym:cytoadherence to microvasculature, mediated by parasite protein	name:Synonym:cytoadherence to microvasculature, mediated by symbiont protein	name:Synonym:parasite-protein-mediated cytoadherence to microvasculature	name:Synonym:symbiont-protein-mediated cytoadherence to microvasculature	info:Definition:The adherence of symbiont-infected erythrocytes to microvascular endothelium via symbiont proteins embedded in the membrane of the erythrocyte.
0044401	name:Name:multi-species biofilm formation in or on host organism	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of different species attach to and grow in or on a surface in a host species, and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044407	name:Name:single-species biofilm formation in or on host organism	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of the same species attach to and grow in or on a surface in a host species, and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052001	name:Name:Type IV pili-dependent localized adherence to host	info:Definition:Attachment of bacterial clusters to the surface of the host in a type IV pili dependent manner. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075001	name:Name:adhesion of symbiont infection structure to host	name:Synonym:adhesion of symbiont infection structure to host during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:attachment of symbiont infection structure to host	info:Definition:The attachment of an infection structure of the symbiont to its host via adhesion molecules, general stickiness etc., either directly or indirectly. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075004	name:Name:adhesion of symbiont spore to host	name:Synonym:adhesion of symbiont spore to host during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The attachment of a spore of the symbiont to its host via adhesion molecules, general stickiness etc. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051856	name:Name:adhesion to symbiont	info:Definition:The attachment of an organism to its symbiont via adhesion molecules, general stickiness etc., either directly or indirectly. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0023052	name:Name:signaling	name:Synonym:signaling process	name:Synonym:signalling	name:Synonym:signalling process	info:Definition:The entirety of a process in which information is transmitted. This process begins with an active signal and ends when a cellular response has been triggered.
0035636	name:Name:multi-organism signaling	name:Synonym:multi-organism signalling	name:Synonym:pheromone signaling	name:Synonym:signaling between organisms	name:Synonym:signaling with other organism	info:Definition:The transfer of information between living organisms.
0035637	name:Name:multicellular organismal signaling	name:Synonym:multicellular organismal signalling	info:Definition:The transfer of information occurring at the level of a multicellular organism.
0019226	name:Name:transmission of nerve impulse	name:Synonym:signal transmission along a neuron	info:Definition:The neurological system process in which a signal is transmitted through the nervous system by synaptic transmission and the sequential electrochemical polarization and depolarization that travels across the membrane of a nerve cell (neuron) in response to stimulation.
0032501	name:Name:multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:organismal physiological process	info:Definition:Any biological process, occurring at the level of a multicellular organism, pertinent to its function.
0001503	name:Name:ossification	name:Synonym:bone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:bone formation	name:Synonym:osteogenesis	info:Definition:The formation of bone or of a bony substance, or the conversion of fibrous tissue or of cartilage into bone or a bony substance.
0001957	name:Name:intramembranous ossification	info:Definition:The formation of bone in which osteoblasts secrete a collagen-proteoglycan matrix that binds calcium salts and becomes calcified. Intramembranous ossification is the way flat bones and the shell of a turtle are formed.
0001958	name:Name:endochondral ossification	info:Definition:The formation of bone by the replacement of cartilage tissue with mineralized bone.
0043931	name:Name:ossification involved in bone maturation	name:Synonym:ossification involved in skeletal development	info:Definition:The formation of bone or of a bony substance, or the conversion of fibrous tissue or of cartilage into bone, involved in the progression of the skeleton from its formation to its mature state.
0043932	name:Name:ossification involved in bone remodeling	name:Synonym:ossification involved in bone remodelling	info:Definition:The formation of bone involved in the continuous turnover of bone matrix and mineral.
0001763	name:Name:morphogenesis of a branching structure	name:Synonym:branching morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of branches are generated and organized. A branch is a division or offshoot from a main stem. Examples in animals would include blood vessels, nerves, lymphatics and other endothelial or epithelial tubes.
0048754	name:Name:branching morphogenesis of a tube	name:Synonym:tubulogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of branches in a tube are generated and organized. A tube is a long hollow cylinder.
0001569	name:Name:patterning of blood vessels	name:Synonym:branching involved in blood vessel morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process that regulates the coordinated growth and sprouting of blood vessels giving rise to the organized vascular system.
0001658	name:Name:branching involved in ureteric bud morphogenesis	name:Synonym:ureteric bud branching	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the ureteric bud is generated and organized. The ureteric bud is an epithelial tube that grows out from the metanephric duct. The bud elongates and branches to give rise to the ureter and kidney collecting tubules.
0060441	name:Name:epithelial tube branching involved in lung morphogenesis	name:Synonym:lung branching morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a highly ordered sequence of patterning events generates the branched epithelial tubes of the lung, consisting of reiterated combinations of bud outgrowth, elongation, and dichotomous subdivision of terminal units.
0060444	name:Name:branching involved in mammary gland duct morphogenesis	name:Synonym:mammary gland branching morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the mammary gland duct is generated and organized. The mammary gland is a large compound sebaceous gland that in female mammals is modified to secrete milk.
0060446	name:Name:branching involved in open tracheal system development	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of branches in the open tracheal system are generated and organized.
0048755	name:Name:branching morphogenesis of a nerve	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of branches in a nerve are generated and organized. This term refers to an anatomical structure (nerve) not a cell (neuron).
0061138	name:Name:morphogenesis of a branching epithelium	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a branched epithelium are generated and organized.
0060445	name:Name:branching involved in salivary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the branching structure of the salivary gland is generated and organized.
0060670	name:Name:branching involved in embryonic placenta morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the branches of the fetal placental villi are generated and organized. The villous part of the placenta is called the labyrinth layer.
0061114	name:Name:branching involved in pancreas morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the branches of the pancreas are generated and organized.
0001816	name:Name:cytokine production	name:Synonym:interferon production	name:Synonym:interleukin production	info:Definition:The appearance of a cytokine due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002390	name:Name:platelet activating factor production	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of platelet activating factor following a stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002391	name:Name:platelet activating factor production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:platelet activating factor production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of platelet activating factor following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002534	name:Name:cytokine production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:cytokine production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of a cytokine following a inflammatory stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0010573	name:Name:vascular endothelial growth factor production	name:Synonym:VEGF production	info:Definition:The appearance of vascular endothelial growth factor production due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032601	name:Name:connective tissue growth factor production	name:Synonym:CCN2 production	name:Synonym:CTGF production	name:Synonym:Fisp12 production	name:Synonym:Hcs24 production	name:Synonym:hypertrophic chondrocyte-specific gene product 24 production	name:Synonym:IGFBP8 production	info:Definition:The appearance of connective tissue growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032602	name:Name:chemokine production	info:Definition:The appearance of a chemokine due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032603	name:Name:fractalkine production	info:Definition:The appearance of fractalkine due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0035393	name:Name:chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 9 production	name:Synonym:CXCL9 production	name:Synonym:MIG production	name:Synonym:Monokine induced by gamma interferon production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 9 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0035530	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 6 production	name:Synonym:CCL6 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 6 (CCL6) due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071605	name:Name:monocyte chemotactic protein-1 production	name:Synonym:CCL2 production	name:Synonym:MCP-1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071606	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 4 production	name:Synonym:CCL4 production	name:Synonym:macrophage inflammatory protein production	name:Synonym:MIP-1b production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 4 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071607	name:Name:macrophage inflammatory protein-1 gamma production	name:Synonym:CCL9 production	name:Synonym:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 9 production	name:Synonym:MIP-1g production	info:Definition:The appearance of macrophage inflammatory protein-1 gamma due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071608	name:Name:macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha production	name:Synonym:CCL3 production	name:Synonym:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3 production	name:Synonym:macrophage inflammatory protein production	name:Synonym:MIP-1a production	info:Definition:The appearance of macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071609	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 production	name:Synonym:CCL5 production	name:Synonym:RANTES production	name:Synonym:Regulated upon Activation, Normal T-cell Expressed, and Secreted production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071610	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 1 production	name:Synonym:CCL1 production	name:Synonym:T cell activation 3 production	name:Synonym:TCA-3 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071612	name:Name:IP-10 production	name:Synonym:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 10 production	name:Synonym:CXCL10 production	info:Definition:The appearance of IP-10 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071924	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 22 production	name:Synonym:C-C motif chemokine 22 production	name:Synonym:CCL-22 production	name:Synonym:CCL22 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 22 (CCL22) due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071925	name:Name:thymic stromal lymphopoietin production	name:Synonym:TSLP production	info:Definition:The appearance of thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071954	name:Name:chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 11 production	name:Synonym:C-C motif chemokine 11 production	name:Synonym:CCL-11 production	name:Synonym:CCL11 production	name:Synonym:eotaxin production	name:Synonym:eotaxin-1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 11 (CCL11, also known as eotaxin-1) due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072566	name:Name:chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 production	name:Synonym:CXCL1 production	name:Synonym:KC production	name:Synonym:keratinocyte derived chemokine production	name:Synonym:SCYB1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072567	name:Name:chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 production	name:Synonym:CXCL2 production	name:Synonym:MIP-2 production	name:Synonym:MIP2 production	name:Synonym:SCYB2 production	info:Definition:The appearance of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032604	name:Name:granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor production	name:Synonym:granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor production	info:Definition:The appearance of granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032605	name:Name:hepatocyte growth factor production	info:Definition:The appearance of hepatocyte growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032606	name:Name:type I interferon production	name:Synonym:interferon type I production	name:Synonym:type I IFN production	info:Definition:The appearance of type I interferon due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels. Type I interferons include the interferon-alpha, beta, delta, episilon, zeta, kappa, tau, and omega gene families.
0032607	name:Name:interferon-alpha production	name:Synonym:IFN-alpha production	name:Synonym:IFNA production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-alpha due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032608	name:Name:interferon-beta production	name:Synonym:IFN-beta production	name:Synonym:IFNB production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-beta due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072645	name:Name:interferon-delta production	name:Synonym:IFN-delta production	name:Synonym:IFND production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-delta due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072647	name:Name:interferon-epsilon production	name:Synonym:IFN-epsilon production	name:Synonym:IFNE production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-epsilon due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072649	name:Name:interferon-kappa production	name:Synonym:IFN-kappa production	name:Synonym:IFNK production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-kappa due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072651	name:Name:interferon-tau production	name:Synonym:IFN-tau production	name:Synonym:IFNT production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-tau due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072653	name:Name:interferon-omega production	name:Synonym:IFN-omega production	name:Synonym:IFNW production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-omega due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032609	name:Name:interferon-gamma production	name:Synonym:IFNG production	name:Synonym:type II IFN production	name:Synonym:type II interferon production	info:Definition:The appearance of interferon-gamma due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels. Interferon-gamma is also known as type II interferon.
0032612	name:Name:interleukin-1 production	name:Synonym:IL-1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032610	name:Name:interleukin-1 alpha production	name:Synonym:IL-1 alpha production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-1 alpha due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032611	name:Name:interleukin-1 beta production	name:Synonym:IL-1 beta production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-1 beta due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032613	name:Name:interleukin-10 production	name:Synonym:IL-10 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-10 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032614	name:Name:interleukin-11 production	name:Synonym:IL-11 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-11 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032615	name:Name:interleukin-12 production	name:Synonym:IL-12 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-12 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032616	name:Name:interleukin-13 production	name:Synonym:IL-13 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-13 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032617	name:Name:interleukin-14 production	name:Synonym:IL-14 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-14 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032618	name:Name:interleukin-15 production	name:Synonym:IL-15 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-15 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032619	name:Name:interleukin-16 production	name:Synonym:IL-16 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-16 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032620	name:Name:interleukin-17 production	name:Synonym:IL-17 production	info:Definition:The appearance of any member of the interleukin-17 family of cytokines due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0097087	name:Name:interleukin-17A production	name:Synonym:IL-17A production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-17A due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0097088	name:Name:interleukin-17F production	name:Synonym:IL-17F production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-17F due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032621	name:Name:interleukin-18 production	name:Synonym:IL-18 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-18 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032622	name:Name:interleukin-19 production	name:Synonym:IL-19 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-19 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032623	name:Name:interleukin-2 production	name:Synonym:IL-2 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-2 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032624	name:Name:interleukin-20 production	name:Synonym:IL-20 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-20 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032625	name:Name:interleukin-21 production	name:Synonym:IL-21 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-21 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032626	name:Name:interleukin-22 production	name:Synonym:IL-22 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-22 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032627	name:Name:interleukin-23 production	name:Synonym:IL-23 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-23 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032628	name:Name:interleukin-24 production	name:Synonym:IL-24 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-24 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032629	name:Name:interleukin-25 production	name:Synonym:IL-25 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-25 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032630	name:Name:interleukin-26 production	name:Synonym:IL-26 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-26 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032631	name:Name:interleukin-27 production	name:Synonym:IL-27 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-27 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032632	name:Name:interleukin-3 production	name:Synonym:IL-3 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-3 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032633	name:Name:interleukin-4 production	name:Synonym:IL-4 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-4 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032634	name:Name:interleukin-5 production	name:Synonym:IL-5 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-5 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032635	name:Name:interleukin-6 production	name:Synonym:IL-6 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-6 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032636	name:Name:interleukin-7 production	name:Synonym:IL-7 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-7 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032637	name:Name:interleukin-8 production	name:Synonym:IL-8 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-8 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032638	name:Name:interleukin-9 production	name:Synonym:IL-9 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-9 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0034343	name:Name:type III interferon production	name:Synonym:type III IFN production	info:Definition:The appearance of type III interferon due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels. Type III interferons are members of the interferon-lambda gene family.
0072627	name:Name:interleukin-28A production	name:Synonym:IL-28A production	name:Synonym:IL28A production	name:Synonym:interferon lambda 2 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-28A due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072629	name:Name:interleukin-28B production	name:Synonym:IL-28B production	name:Synonym:IL28B production	name:Synonym:interferon lambda 3 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-28B due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072631	name:Name:interleukin-29 production	name:Synonym:IL-29 production	name:Synonym:IL29 production	name:Synonym:interferon lambda 1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-29 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0070753	name:Name:interleukin-35 production	name:Synonym:IL-35 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-35 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071604	name:Name:transforming growth factor-beta production	name:Synonym:TGF-B production	name:Synonym:TGF-beta production	name:Synonym:TGFB production	name:Synonym:TGFb production	info:Definition:The appearance of any member of the transforming growth factor-beta family of cytokines due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels. Transforming growth factor-beta family members include TGF-B1, TGF-B2, and TGF-B3.
0032905	name:Name:transforming growth factor-beta1 production	name:Synonym:TGF-B1 production	name:Synonym:TGFB1 production	info:Definition:The appearance of transforming growth factor-beta1 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032906	name:Name:transforming growth factor-beta2 production	name:Synonym:TGF-B2 production	name:Synonym:TGFB2 production	info:Definition:The appearance of transforming growth factor-beta2 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032907	name:Name:transforming growth factor-beta3 production	name:Synonym:TGF-B3 production	name:Synonym:TGFB3 production	info:Definition:The appearance of transforming growth factor-beta3 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071611	name:Name:granulocyte colony-stimulating factor production	name:Synonym:colony stimulating factor 3 (granulocyte) production	name:Synonym:CSF3 production	name:Synonym:filgrastim production	name:Synonym:G-CSF production	name:Synonym:granulocyte colony stimulating factor production	name:Synonym:lenograstim production	name:Synonym:pluripoietin production	info:Definition:The appearance of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0071706	name:Name:tumor necrosis factor superfamily cytokine production	name:Synonym:TNF superfamily production	name:Synonym:TNFSF cytokine production	info:Definition:The appearance of any member of the TNF superfamily due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032639	name:Name:TRAIL production	info:Definition:The appearance of TRAIL due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032640	name:Name:tumor necrosis factor production	name:Synonym:TNF production	name:Synonym:TNF-alpha production	name:Synonym:tumor necrosis factor-alpha production	info:Definition:The appearance of tumor necrosis factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032641	name:Name:lymphotoxin A production	name:Synonym:LTA production	name:Synonym:lymphotoxin-alpha production	name:Synonym:TNF-beta production	name:Synonym:tumor necrosis factor-beta production	info:Definition:The appearance of lymphotoxin A due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072535	name:Name:tumor necrosis factor (ligand) superfamily member 11 production	name:Synonym:RANKL production	name:Synonym:TNFSF11 production	info:Definition:The appearance of tumor necrosis factor superfamily member 11 (TNFSF11; RANKL) due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072633	name:Name:interleukin-30 production	name:Synonym:IL-30 production	name:Synonym:interleukin-30 complex production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-30 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072635	name:Name:interleukin-31 production	name:Synonym:IL-31 production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-31 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072637	name:Name:interleukin-32 production	name:Synonym:IL-32 production	name:Synonym:IL32 production	name:Synonym:NK4 production	name:Synonym:TAIF production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-32 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0072639	name:Name:interleukin-33 production	name:Synonym:C9orf26 production	name:Synonym:IL-33 production	name:Synonym:IL1F11 production	name:Synonym:IL33 production	name:Synonym:NF-HEV production	info:Definition:The appearance of interleukin-33 due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090269	name:Name:fibroblast growth factor production	info:Definition:The appearance of a fibroblast growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090270	name:Name:regulation of fibroblast growth factor production	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the appearance of a fibroblast growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090271	name:Name:positive regulation of fibroblast growth factor production	info:Definition:Any process that increases the rate, frequency or extent of the appearance of a fibroblast growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090272	name:Name:negative regulation of fibroblast growth factor production	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the rate, frequency or extent of the appearance of a fibroblast growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0090360	name:Name:platelet-derived growth factor production	info:Definition:The appearance of any platelet-derived growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion following a cellular stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002021	name:Name:response to dietary excess	info:Definition:The physiological process in which dietary excess is sensed by the central nervous system, resulting in a reduction in food intake and increased energy expenditure.
0002532	name:Name:production of molecular mediator involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of cellular mediator of acute inflammation	name:Synonym:production of molecular mediator involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of any molecular mediator of the inflammatory response following an inflammatory stimulus, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002349	name:Name:histamine production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:histamine production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of histamine following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002351	name:Name:serotonin production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:serotonin production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of serotonin following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002393	name:Name:lysosomal enzyme production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:lysosomal enzyme production involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of lysosomal enzymes involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of lysosomal enzymes involved in inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of lysosomal enzymes following a stimulus as part of a inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002537	name:Name:nitric oxide production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:nitric oxide production involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of nitric oxide involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of nitric oxide involved in inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of nitric oxide following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002538	name:Name:arachidonic acid metabolite production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:arachidonic acid metabolite production involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of arachidonic acid metabolites involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:production of arachidonic acid metabolites involved in inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of products of arachidonic acid metabolism following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in their intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002539	name:Name:prostaglandin production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:prostaglandin production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of any prostaglandin following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0002540	name:Name:leukotriene production involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:leukotriene production involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:The synthesis or release of any leukotriene following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0003008	name:Name:system process	name:Synonym:organ system process	info:Definition:A multicellular organismal process carried out by any of the organs or tissues in an organ system. An organ system is a regularly interacting or interdependent group of organs or tissues that work together to carry out a biological objective.
0003012	name:Name:muscle system process	name:Synonym:muscle physiological process	info:Definition:A organ system process carried out at the level of a muscle. Muscle tissue is composed of contractile cells or fibers.
0006936	name:Name:muscle contraction	info:Definition:A process in which force is generated within muscle tissue, resulting in a change in muscle geometry. Force generation involves a chemo-mechanical energy conversion step that is carried out by the actin/myosin complex activity, which generates force through ATP hydrolysis.
0014896	name:Name:muscle hypertrophy	info:Definition:The muscle system process that results in enlargement or overgrowth of all or part of a muscle organ due to an increase in the size of its muscle cells. Physiological hypertrophy is a normal process during development (it stops in cardiac muscle after adolescence) and can also be brought on in response to demand. In athletes cardiac and skeletal muscles undergo hypertrophy stimulated by increasing muscle activity on exercise. Smooth muscle cells in the uterus undergo hypertrophy during pregnancy.
0043500	name:Name:muscle adaptation	name:Synonym:muscle plasticity	info:Definition:A process in which muscle adapts, with consequent modifications to structural and/or functional phenotypes, in response to a stimulus. Stimuli include contractile activity, loading conditions, substrate supply, and environmental factors. These adaptive events occur in both muscle fibers and associated structures (motoneurons and capillaries), and they involve alterations in regulatory mechanisms, contractile properties and metabolic capacities.
0090075	name:Name:relaxation of muscle	info:Definition:A process in which the extent of muscle contraction is reduced. Muscle relaxation can involve a number of processes including the removal of calcium from the cytoplasm to the sarcoplasmic reticulum lumen through the action of Ca2+ ATPases. In some muscles, calcium-independent pathways also play a role in muscle relaxation by decreasing the phosphorylation state of myosin light chain.
0003013	name:Name:circulatory system process	info:Definition:A organ system process carried out by any of the organs or tissues of the circulatory system. The circulatory system is an organ system that moves extracellular fluids to and from tissue within a multicellular organism.
0003015	name:Name:heart process	name:Synonym:cardiac process	info:Definition:A circulatory system process carried out by the heart. The heart is a hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood. The heart is a hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood.
0003017	name:Name:lymph circulation	info:Definition:The flow of lymph through the body of an animal.
0003018	name:Name:vascular process in circulatory system	name:Synonym:vasculature process	info:Definition:A circulatory process that occurs at the level of the vasculature.
0008015	name:Name:blood circulation	name:Synonym:hemolymph circulation	info:Definition:The flow of blood through the body of an animal, enabling the transport of nutrients to the tissues and the removal of waste products.
0003014	name:Name:renal system process	name:Synonym:kidney system process	info:Definition:A organ system process carried out by any of the organs or tissues of the renal system. The renal system is responsible for fluid volume regulation and detoxification in an organism.
0003071	name:Name:renal system process involved in regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	name:Synonym:renal control of blood pressure	name:Synonym:renal regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	info:Definition:Renal process that modulates the force with which blood travels through the circulatory system. The process is controlled by a balance of processes that increase pressure and decrease pressure.
0003091	name:Name:renal water homeostasis	name:Synonym:water homeostasis by the kidney	info:Definition:Renal process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of water in the body.
0003094	name:Name:glomerular filtration	info:Definition:The process in which plasma is filtered through the glomerular membrane which consists of capillary endothelial cells, the basement membrane, and epithelial cells. The glomerular filtrate is the same as plasma except it has no significant amount of protein.
0003096	name:Name:renal sodium ion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of sodium ions (Na+) by the kidney.
0003097	name:Name:renal water transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of water (H2O) by the kidney.
0035809	name:Name:regulation of urine volume	name:Synonym:regulation of urinary volume	name:Synonym:regulation of urine flow	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the amount of urine excreted from the body over a unit of time.
0035812	name:Name:renal sodium excretion	info:Definition:The elimination by an organism of sodium in the urine.
0035828	name:Name:renal rubidium ion transport	name:Synonym:renal Rb+ transport	name:Synonym:renal rubidium cation transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of rubidium ions (Rb+) by the kidney.
0060073	name:Name:micturition	name:Synonym:urination	name:Synonym:urine voiding	info:Definition:The regulation of body fluids process in which parasympathetic nerves stimulate the bladder wall muscle to contract and expel urine from the body.
0070293	name:Name:renal absorption	name:Synonym:nephron absorption	name:Synonym:renal reabsorption	info:Definition:A renal system process in which water, ions, glucose and proteins are taken up from the collecting ducts, glomerulus and proximal and distal loops of the nephron.
0003016	name:Name:respiratory system process	name:Synonym:respiratory gaseous exchange by respiratory system	info:Definition:A system process carried out by the organs and tissues of the respiratory system. The respiratory system is an organ system responsible for respiratory gaseous exchange.
0002086	name:Name:diaphragm contraction	info:Definition:A process in which force is generated within involuntary skeletal muscle tissue, resulting in a change in muscle geometry. This process occurs in the diaphragm. Force generation involves a chemo-mechanical energy conversion step that is carried out by the actin/myosin complex activity, which generates force through ATP hydrolysis. The diaphragm is a striated muscle that is necessary for the process of respiratory gaseous exchange.
0007588	name:Name:excretion	info:Definition:The elimination by an organism of the waste products that arise as a result of metabolic activity. These products include water, carbon dioxide (CO2), and nitrogenous compounds.
0030421	name:Name:defecation	info:Definition:The expulsion of feces from the rectum.
0022600	name:Name:digestive system process	info:Definition:A physical, chemical, or biochemical process carried out by living organisms to break down ingested nutrients into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0001696	name:Name:gastric acid secretion	name:Synonym:hydrochloric acid secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of gastric acid (hydrochloric acid) by parietal or oxyntic cells during digestion.
0030157	name:Name:pancreatic juice secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of pancreatic juice by the exocrine pancreas into the upper part of the intestine. Pancreatic juice is slightly alkaline and contains numerous enzymes and inactive enzyme precursors including alpha-amylase, chymotrypsinogen, lipase, procarboxypeptidase, proelastase, prophospholipase A2, ribonuclease, and trypsinogen. Its high concentration of bicarbonate ions helps to neutralize the acid from the stomach.
0030277	name:Name:maintenance of gastrointestinal epithelium	info:Definition:Protection of epithelial surfaces of the gastrointestinal tract from proteolytic and caustic digestive agents.
0035482	name:Name:gastric motility	info:Definition:The spontaneous peristaltic movements of the stomach that aid in digestion, moving food through the stomach and out through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum.
0043133	name:Name:hindgut contraction	info:Definition:A process in which force is generated within smooth muscle tissue, resulting in a change in muscle geometry. This process occurs in the hindgut. Force generation involves a chemo-mechanical energy conversion step that is carried out by the actin/myosin complex activity, which generates force through ATP hydrolysis. The hindgut is the posterior part of the alimentary canal, including the rectum, and the large intestine.
0046541	name:Name:saliva secretion	name:Synonym:salivation	info:Definition:The regulated release of saliva from the salivary glands. In man, the saliva is a turbid and slightly viscous fluid, generally of an alkaline reaction, and is secreted by the parotid, submaxillary, and sublingual glands. In the mouth the saliva is mixed with the secretion from the buccal glands. In man and many animals, saliva is an important digestive fluid on account of the presence of the peculiar enzyme, ptyalin.
0050892	name:Name:intestinal absorption	info:Definition:Any process in which nutrients are taken up from the contents of the intestine.
0071626	name:Name:mastication	name:Synonym:chewing	info:Definition:The process of biting and mashing food with the teeth prior to swallowing.
0050877	name:Name:neurological system process	name:Synonym:neurophysiological process	name:Synonym:pan-neural process	info:Definition:A organ system process carried out by any of the organs or tissues of neurological system.
0001976	name:Name:neurological system process involved in regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	name:Synonym:blood pressure regulation by neurological process	name:Synonym:fast control of arterial pressure	name:Synonym:neurological process involved in regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	info:Definition:The regulation of blood pressure mediated by detection of stimuli and a neurological response.
0002008	name:Name:excitation of vasomotor center by chemoreceptor signaling	name:Synonym:excitation of vasomotor center by chemoreceptor signalling	info:Definition:The process in which the molecular signal from the carotid and aortic bodies is relayed to the vasomotor center, causing it to signal an increase arterial pressure.
0002010	name:Name:excitation of vasomotor center by baroreceptor signaling	name:Synonym:excitation of vasomotor center by baroreceptor signalling	info:Definition:The process in which the molecular signal from the arterial baroreceptors is relayed to the vasomotor center causing it to signal increase arterial pressure.
0002022	name:Name:detection of dietary excess	info:Definition:The neurological process in which the brain senses excessive caloric intake.
0002087	name:Name:regulation of respiratory gaseous exchange by neurological system process	name:Synonym:neurological control of breathing	info:Definition:A process carried out by the nervous system that is required for the proper control of respiratory gaseous exchange. This process occurs in the respiratory center of the brain in vertebrates.
0003019	name:Name:central nervous system control of baroreceptor feedback	info:Definition:The neurological process in which nerve impulses arising in the aorta or the carotid sinuses travel to the medulla and reach the nucleus of tractus solaris.
0007600	name:Name:sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events required for an organism to receive a sensory stimulus, convert it to a molecular signal, and recognize and characterize the signal. This is a neurological process.
0019227	name:Name:neuronal action potential propagation	info:Definition:A neurological process that causes the sequential depolarization of a neuron's cell membrane along an axon.
0050890	name:Name:cognition	info:Definition:The operation of the mind by which an organism becomes aware of objects of thought or perception; it includes the mental activities associated with thinking, learning, and memory.
0050905	name:Name:neuromuscular process	name:Synonym:neuromotor process	name:Synonym:neuromuscular physiological process	info:Definition:Any process pertaining to the functions of the nervous and muscular systems of an organism.
0050910	name:Name:detection of mechanical stimulus involved in sensory perception of sound	name:Synonym:detection of sound	name:Synonym:hearing, sensory transduction of sound	name:Synonym:perception of sound, detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of sound, sensory detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of sound, sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of mechanical stimulus during perception of sound	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus during perception of sound	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of sound	info:Definition:The series of events involved in the perception of sound vibration. The vibration is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050959	name:Name:echolocation	name:Synonym:perception of environment using reflected sound waves	info:Definition:Echolocation is the method used by some animals (e.g. bats, dolphins and some whales) to determine the location of something by measuring the time it takes for an echo to return from it. These animals emit sound waves and listen for the echo, calculating the distance to the object from the time lapse between sound emission and the echo returning.
0071066	name:Name:detection of mechanical stimulus involved in sensory perception of wind	name:Synonym:detection of mechanical stimulus involved in sensory perception of air flow	name:Synonym:detection of wind	name:Synonym:perception of wind, detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of wind, sensory detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of wind, sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of mechanical stimulus during perception of wind	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus during perception of wind	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of wind	info:Definition:The series of events involved in the perception of wind in which a sensory mechanical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050886	name:Name:endocrine process	name:Synonym:endocrine physiological process	name:Synonym:endocrine physiology	info:Definition:The process that involves the secretion of or response to endocrine hormones. An endocrine hormone is a hormone released into the circulatory system.
0001990	name:Name:regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure by hormone	name:Synonym:blood pressure regulation by hormone	name:Synonym:hormonal control of blood pressure	name:Synonym:hormonal regulation of blood pressure	info:Definition:The process in which hormones modulate the force with which blood passes through the circulatory system. A hormone is one of a group of substances formed in very small amounts in one specialized organ or group of cells and carried (sometimes in the bloodstream) to another organ or group of cells, in the same organism, upon which they have a specific regulatory action.
0061007	name:Name:hepaticobiliary system process	name:Synonym:hepatobiliary system process	info:Definition:An system process carried out by any of the organs or tissues of the hepaticobiliary system. The hepaticobiliary system is responsible for metabolic and catabolic processing of small molecules absorbed from the blood or gut, hormones and serum proteins, detoxification, storage of glycogen, triglycerides, metals and lipid soluble vitamins and excretion of bile. Included are the synthesis of albumin, blood coagulation factors, complement, and specific binding proteins.
0007275	name:Name:multicellular organismal development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a multicellular organism over time from an initial condition (e.g. a zygote or a young adult) to a later condition (e.g. a multicellular animal or an aged adult).
0048229	name:Name:gametophyte development	name:Synonym:gametogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the gametophyte over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The gametophyte is the gamete-producing individual or phase in the life cycle having alternation of generations. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0009553	name:Name:embryo sac development	name:Synonym:female gametophyte development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryo sac over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The process begins with the meiosis of the megasporocyte to form four haploid megaspores. Three of the megaspores disintegrate, and the fourth undergoes mitosis giving rise to a binucleate syncytial embryo sac. The two haploid nuclei migrate to the opposite poles of the embryo sac and then undergo two rounds of mitosis generating four haploid nuclei at each pole. One nucleus from each set of four migrates to the center of the cell. Cellularization occurs, resulting in an eight-nucleate seven-celled structure. This structure contains two synergid cells and an egg cell at the micropylar end, and three antipodal cells at the other end. A binucleate endosperm mother cell is formed at the center. The two polar nuclei fuse resulting in a mononucleate diploid endosperm mother cell. The three antipodal cells degenerate.
0009555	name:Name:pollen development	name:Synonym:formation of generative and vegetative cells	name:Synonym:male gametophyte development	name:Synonym:male gametophyte formation	name:Synonym:microgametophyte development	name:Synonym:pollen grain formation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pollen grain over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The process begins with the meiosis of the microsporocyte to form four haploid microspores. The nucleus of each microspore then divides by mitosis to form a two-celled organism, the pollen grain, that contains a tube cell as well as a smaller generative cell. The pollen grain is surrounded by an elaborate cell wall. In some species, the generative cell immediately divides again to give a pair of sperm cells. In most flowering plants, however this division takes place later, in the tube that develops when a pollen grain germinates.
0007585	name:Name:respiratory gaseous exchange	name:Synonym:breathing	name:Synonym:respiration	info:Definition:The process of gaseous exchange between an organism and its environment. In plants, microorganisms, and many small animals, air or water makes direct contact with the organism's cells or tissue fluids, and the processes of diffusion supply the organism with dioxygen (O2) and remove carbon dioxide (CO2). In larger animals the efficiency of gaseous exchange is improved by specialized respiratory organs, such as lungs and gills, which are ventilated by breathing mechanisms.
0007586	name:Name:digestion	info:Definition:The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by multicellular organisms to break down ingested nutrients into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0044241	name:Name:lipid digestion	info:Definition:The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by living organisms to break down ingested lipids into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0044245	name:Name:polysaccharide digestion	info:Definition:The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by living organisms to break down ingested polysaccharides into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0044256	name:Name:protein digestion	info:Definition:The whole of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by living organisms to break down ingested proteins into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0007632	name:Name:visual behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to visual stimulus	name:Synonym:behavioural response to visual stimulus	name:Synonym:visual behaviour	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an organism in response to a visual stimulus.
0007633	name:Name:pattern orientation	name:Synonym:behavioral response to pattern orientation	name:Synonym:behavioural response to pattern orientation	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an individual in response to the orientation of a visual pattern. This is exemplified by some classes of insects which are able to detect and learn the orientation of a set of stripes and subsequently behaviorally discriminate between horizontal, vertical or 45 degree stripes.
0007634	name:Name:optokinetic behavior	name:Synonym:optokinetic behaviour	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an organism pertaining to movement of the eyes and of objects in the visual field, as in nystagmus.
0071632	name:Name:optomotor response	info:Definition:Eye, head or whole body movements that help to compensate movements of the environment in order to stabilize its image on the retina. In the case of whole body movements, these motor actions may also stabilize a locomotor course in response to some disturbance. Examples include: the optokinetic reflex, which allows human eyes to follow objects in motion while the head remains stationary reflex; the optomotor responses of flying insects and swimming fish.
0008542	name:Name:visual learning	name:Synonym:spatial learning	info:Definition:Any process in an organism in which a change in behavior of an individual occurs in response to repeated exposure to a visual cue.
0008340	name:Name:determination of adult lifespan	info:Definition:The control of viability and duration in the adult phase of the life-cycle.
0009606	name:Name:tropism	info:Definition:The movement of an organism, or part of an organism, in response to an external source of stimulus, usually toward or away from it.
0009630	name:Name:gravitropism	name:Synonym:geotropism	info:Definition:The orientation of plant parts under the stimulation of gravity.
0009958	name:Name:positive gravitropism	name:Synonym:root gravitropism	info:Definition:The orientation of plant parts towards gravity.
0009959	name:Name:negative gravitropism	name:Synonym:shoot gravitropism	info:Definition:The orientation of plant parts away from gravity.
0009638	name:Name:phototropism	info:Definition:The movement of an organism, or part of an organism, in response to a light stimulus, usually toward or away from it.
0009652	name:Name:thigmotropism	info:Definition:The movement of an organism, or part of an organism, such as leaves or tendrils, in response to a touch stimulus, usually toward or away from it.
0010274	name:Name:hydrotropism	info:Definition:Growth or movement in a sessile organism toward or away from water, as of the roots of a plant.
0043577	name:Name:chemotropism	info:Definition:The movement of an organism, or part of an organism, in response to an external chemical gradient, usually toward or away from it.
0009845	name:Name:seed germination	info:Definition:The physiological and developmental changes that occur in a seed commencing with water uptake (imbibition) and terminating with the elongation of the embryonic axis.
0048623	name:Name:seed germination on parent plant	name:Synonym:non-vegetative vivipary	name:Synonym:pre-harvest sprouting	name:Synonym:vivipary	info:Definition:The process in which a seed germinates before being shed from the parent plant.
0009846	name:Name:pollen germination	info:Definition:The physiological and developmental changes that occur in a heterosporous plant pollen grain, beginning with hydration and terminating with the emergence of the pollen tube through the aperture.
0010232	name:Name:vascular transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances, into, out of or within a cell, either in a vascular tissue or in the vascular membrane.
0010233	name:Name:phloem transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances, into, out of or within a cell, either in a phloem tissue or in the phloem membrane.
0009915	name:Name:phloem sucrose loading	name:Synonym:phloem loading	info:Definition:The process of loading sucrose into the sieve tube or companion cell of the phloem for long distance transport from source to sink.
0090408	name:Name:phloem nitrate loading	name:Synonym:phloem loading	info:Definition:The process of loading nitrate into the sieve tube or companion cell of the phloem for long distance transport from source to sink.
0010496	name:Name:intercellular transport	info:Definition:The movement of substances between cells in a multicellular organism.
0010497	name:Name:plasmodesmata-mediated intercellular transport	name:Synonym:plasmodesma-mediated cell-to-cell transport	name:Synonym:plasmodesma-mediated intercellular transport	name:Synonym:plasmodesmata-mediated cell-to-cell transport	info:Definition:The movement of substances between cells via plasmodesmata. Plasmodesmata is a fine cytoplasmic channel, found in all higher plants, that connects the cytoplasm of one cell to that of an adjacent cell.
0030431	name:Name:sleep	name:Synonym:diapause	name:Synonym:dormancy	name:Synonym:lethargus	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism enters and maintains a periodic, readily reversible state of reduced awareness and metabolic activity. Usually accompanied by physical relaxation, the onset of sleep in humans and other mammals is marked by a change in the electrical activity of the brain.
0042750	name:Name:hibernation	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism enters and maintains a period of dormancy in which to pass the winter. It is characterized by narcosis and by sharp reduction in body temperature and metabolic activity and by a depression of vital signs.
0042751	name:Name:estivation	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism enters and maintains a period of dormancy, similar to hibernation, but that occurs during the summer. It insulates against heat to prevent the harmful effects of the season.
0050802	name:Name:circadian sleep/wake cycle, sleep	info:Definition:The part of the circadian sleep/wake cycle where the organism is asleep.
0030534	name:Name:adult behavior	name:Synonym:adult behavioral response to stimulus	name:Synonym:adult behaviour	name:Synonym:adult behavioural response to stimulus	info:Definition:Behavior in a fully developed and mature organism.
0008343	name:Name:adult feeding behavior	name:Synonym:adult feeding behaviour	info:Definition:Feeding behavior in a fully developed and mature organism.
0008344	name:Name:adult locomotory behavior	name:Synonym:adult locomotory behaviour	info:Definition:Locomotory behavior in a fully developed and mature organism.
0007628	name:Name:adult walking behavior	name:Synonym:adult walking behaviour	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an adult relating to the progression of that organism along the ground by the process of lifting and setting down each leg.
0007629	name:Name:flight behavior	name:Synonym:flight behaviour	info:Definition:The response to external or internal stimuli that results in the locomotory process of flight. Flight is the self-propelled movement of an organism through the air.
0007630	name:Name:jump response	info:Definition:The sudden, usually upward, movement off the ground or other surface through sudden muscular effort in the legs, following exposure to an external stimulus.
0035095	name:Name:behavioral response to nicotine	name:Synonym:behavioural response to nicotine	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of a nicotine stimulus.
0048148	name:Name:behavioral response to cocaine	name:Synonym:behavioural response to cocaine	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of a cocaine stimulus.
0048149	name:Name:behavioral response to ethanol	name:Synonym:behavioural response to ethanol	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of an ethanol stimulus.
0048150	name:Name:behavioral response to ether	name:Synonym:behavioural response to ether	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of an ether stimulus.
0030537	name:Name:larval behavior	name:Synonym:larval behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior in a larval form of an organism, an immature organism that must undergo metamorphosis to assume adult characteristics.
0008345	name:Name:larval locomotory behavior	name:Synonym:larval locomotory behaviour	info:Definition:Locomotory behavior in a larval (immature) organism.
0008346	name:Name:larval walking behavior	name:Synonym:larval walking behaviour	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of a larval organism relating to the progression of that organism along the ground by the process of lifting and setting down each leg.
0035179	name:Name:larval turning behavior	name:Synonym:larval turning behaviour	info:Definition:Fine-tuning the spatial position of a larva in response to variability in their environment. For example, reorientation of a larva in the direction of a food source.
0035180	name:Name:larval wandering behavior	name:Synonym:larval wandering behaviour	info:Definition:The movement of a third instar larva through a substrate in search of a pupation site. This movement occurs without feeding and is characterized by short bursts of forward movement, separated by stops and repeated side-to-side head probes, followed normally by a change in direction.
0035181	name:Name:larval burrowing behavior	name:Synonym:larval burrowing behaviour	info:Definition:Digging into the substrate by non-feeding larvae in search for food-free sites suitable for pupation.
0030536	name:Name:larval feeding behavior	name:Synonym:larval feeding behaviour	info:Definition:Feeding behavior in a larval (immature) organism.
0035177	name:Name:larval foraging behavior	name:Synonym:larval foraging behaviour	info:Definition:The movement of a larva through a feeding substrate whilst feeding on food.
0032898	name:Name:neurotrophin production	info:Definition:The appearance of a neurotrophin due to biosynthesis or secretion by cells in a neuron's target field, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels. A neurotrophin is any of a family of growth factors that block apoptosis in neurons and thus promote nerve growth.
0032902	name:Name:nerve growth factor production	name:Synonym:NGF production	info:Definition:The appearance of nerve growth factor due to biosynthesis or secretion by cells in a neuron's target field, resulting in an increase in its intracellular or extracellular levels.
0032941	name:Name:secretion by tissue	name:Synonym:expulsion of gland contents	name:Synonym:tissue secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a substance by a tissue.
0033555	name:Name:multicellular organismal response to stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a multicellular organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress. The stress is usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0042596	name:Name:fear response	name:Synonym:physiological fear response	info:Definition:The response of an organism to a perceived external threat.
0001662	name:Name:behavioral fear response	name:Synonym:behavioural fear response	info:Definition:An acute behavioral change resulting from a perceived external threat.
0048265	name:Name:response to pain	name:Synonym:physiological response to pain	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pain stimulus. Pain stimuli cause activation of nociceptors, peripheral receptors for pain, include receptors which are sensitive to painful mechanical stimuli, extreme heat or cold, and chemical stimuli.
0048266	name:Name:behavioral response to pain	name:Synonym:behavioural response to pain	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of a pain stimulus. Pain stimuli cause activation of nociceptors, peripheral receptors for pain, include receptors which are sensitive to painful mechanical stimuli, extreme heat or cold, and chemical stimuli.
0051866	name:Name:general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:general adaptation syndrome, physiological process	name:Synonym:general adaptation syndrome, physiological response	name:Synonym:physiological process during general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:physiological response during general adaptation syndrome	info:Definition:General adaptation syndrome is the set of changes in various organ systems of the body, especially the pituitary-endocrine system, in response to a wide range of strong external stimuli, both physiological and psychological. It is described as having three stages: alarm reaction, where the body detects the external stimulus; adaptation, where the body engages defensive countermeasures against the stressor; and exhaustion, where the body begins to run out of defenses.
0034381	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle clearance	name:Synonym:lipoprotein particle clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0034383	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein particle clearance	name:Synonym:LDL clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a low-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0034384	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle clearance	name:Synonym:HDL clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a high-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0034447	name:Name:very-low-density lipoprotein particle clearance	name:Synonym:VLDL clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a very-low-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0071830	name:Name:triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0034382	name:Name:chylomicron remnant clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a chylomicron remnant is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis into liver cells and its constituent parts degraded.
0071831	name:Name:intermediate-density lipoprotein particle clearance	name:Synonym:IDL clearance	info:Definition:The process in which a intermediate-density lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0035187	name:Name:hatching behavior	name:Synonym:hatching behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism during the emergence from an egg shell. In Drosophila for example, the larva swings its head reiteratively through a semicircular arc, using its mouth hooks to tear apart the chorion in front of it and thus free itself from within the egg shell.
0035264	name:Name:multicellular organism growth	name:Synonym:body growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an entire multicellular organism, as opposed to cell growth.
0035314	name:Name:scab formation	info:Definition:Formation of hardened covering (a scab) at a wound site. The scab has multiple functions including limiting blood loss, providing structural stability to the wound and guarding against infection.
0042303	name:Name:molting cycle	info:Definition:The periodic casting off and regeneration of an outer covering of cuticle, feathers, hair, horns, skin, etc.
0018988	name:Name:molting cycle, protein-based cuticle	name:Synonym:protein-based cuticle molting cycle	info:Definition:The periodic shedding of part or all of a protein-based cuticle, which is then replaced by a new protein-based cuticle. A cuticle is the outer layer of an animal which acts to prevent water loss.
0007591	name:Name:molting cycle, chitin-based cuticle	name:Synonym:chitin-based cuticle molting cycle	info:Definition:The periodic shedding of part or all of a chitin-based cuticle, which is then replaced by a new cuticle. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0018996	name:Name:molting cycle, collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle	name:Synonym:collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle molting cycle	info:Definition:The periodic shedding of part or all of a collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle, which is then replaced by a new collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle. An example of this is found in the Nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans.
0022404	name:Name:molting cycle process	info:Definition:A multicellular organismal process involved in the periodic casting off and regeneration of an outer covering of cuticle, feathers, hair, horns, skin.
0018989	name:Name:apolysis	info:Definition:The first process of molting, characterized by the detachment of the old cuticle from the underlying epidermal cells.
0022405	name:Name:hair cycle process	info:Definition:A multicellular organismal process involved in the cyclical phases of growth (anagen), regression (catagen), quiescence (telogen), and shedding (exogen) in the life of a hair; one of the collection or mass of filaments growing from the skin of an animal, and forming a covering for a part of the head or for any part or the whole of the body.
0040006	name:Name:protein-based cuticle attachment to epithelium	name:Synonym:cuticular attachment to epithelium	info:Definition:Attaching of a protein-based cuticle to the epithelium underlying it.
0042336	name:Name:cuticle development involved in protein-based cuticle molting cycle	name:Synonym:cuticle anabolism during molting	name:Synonym:cuticle biosynthetic process during molting	name:Synonym:cuticle formation during molting	name:Synonym:cuticle synthesis during molting	info:Definition:Synthesis and deposition of a protein-based noncellular, hardened, or membranous secretion from an epithelial sheet, occurring as part of the molting cycle. Examples of this process are found in invertebrate species.
0042394	name:Name:ecdysis, protein-based cuticle	info:Definition:The shedding of the old protein-based cuticular fragments during the molting cycle. Examples of this process are found in invertebrates.
0042633	name:Name:hair cycle	info:Definition:The cyclical phases of growth (anagen), regression (catagen), quiescence (telogen), and shedding (exogen) in the life of a hair; one of the collection or mass of filaments growing from the skin of an animal, and forming a covering for a part of the head or for any part or the whole of the body.
0043480	name:Name:pigment accumulation in tissues	name:Synonym:organismal pigment accumulation	info:Definition:The aggregation of coloring matter in a particular location in a tissue, occurring in response to an external stimulus.
0043479	name:Name:pigment accumulation in tissues in response to UV light	info:Definition:The aggregation of coloring matter in a particular location in a tissue, occurring in response to a UV light stimulus.
0043481	name:Name:anthocyanin accumulation in tissues in response to UV light	info:Definition:The aggregation of the pigment anthocyanin in a particular location in a tissue, occurring in response to a UV light stimulus.
0048771	name:Name:tissue remodeling	info:Definition:The reorganization or renovation of existing tissues. This process can either change the characteristics of a tissue such as in blood vessel remodeling, or result in the dynamic equilibrium of a tissue such as in bone remodeling.
0001974	name:Name:blood vessel remodeling	info:Definition:The reorganization or renovation of existing blood vessels.
0002247	name:Name:clearance of damaged tissue involved in inflammatory response wound healing	name:Synonym:clearance of damaged tissue during inflammatory response	info:Definition:The series of events leading to removal of necrotic debris that contribute to an inflammatory response.
0002248	name:Name:connective tissue replacement involved in inflammatory response wound healing	name:Synonym:connective tissue replacement during inflammatory response	name:Synonym:fibrosis during inflammatory response	info:Definition:The series of events leading to growth of connective tissue when loss of tissues that are incapable of regeneration occurs, or when fibrinous exudate cannot be adequately cleared that contribute to an inflammatory response.
0003294	name:Name:atrial ventricular junction remodeling	name:Synonym:atrio-ventricular junction remodeling 	name:Synonym:atrioventricular junction remodeling 	info:Definition:The reorganization or renovation of heart tissue that contributes to the maturation of the connection between an atrium and a ventricle.
0034102	name:Name:erythrocyte clearance	name:Synonym:neocytolysis	name:Synonym:RBC clearance	name:Synonym:red blood cell clearance	info:Definition:The selective elimination of erythrocytes from the body by autoregulatory mechanisms.
0046849	name:Name:bone remodeling	name:Synonym:bone remodelling	info:Definition:The continuous turnover of bone matrix and mineral that involves first, an increase in resorption (osteoclastic activity) and later, reactive bone formation (osteoblastic activity). The process of bone remodeling takes place in the adult skeleton at discrete foci. The process ensures the mechanical integrity of the skeleton throughout life and plays an important role in calcium homeostasis. An imbalance in the regulation of bone resorption and bone formation results in many of the metabolic bone diseases, such as osteoporosis.
0060056	name:Name:mammary gland involution	info:Definition:The tissue remodeling that removes differentiated mammary epithelia during weaning.
0048871	name:Name:multicellular organismal homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state at the level of the multicellular organism.
0001659	name:Name:temperature homeostasis	name:Synonym:thermoregulation	info:Definition:A homeostatic process in which an organism modulates its internal body temperature.
0031649	name:Name:heat generation	info:Definition:Any homeostatic process in which an organism produces heat, thereby raising its internal temperature.
0031653	name:Name:heat dissipation	info:Definition:Any homeostatic process in which an organism releases excess heat to the environment, thereby lowering its internal temperature.
0042309	name:Name:homoiothermy	name:Synonym:antifreeze activity	name:Synonym:ice nucleation activity	name:Synonym:ice nucleation inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Any homoeostatic process in which an organism maintains its internal body temperature at a relatively constant value. This is achieved by using metabolic processes to counteract fluctuations in the temperature of the environment.
0060086	name:Name:circadian temperature homeostasis	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of body temperature	name:Synonym:circadian thermoregulation	info:Definition:Any homeostatic process in which an organism modulates its internal body temperature at different values with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0060586	name:Name:multicellular organismal iron ion homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of the distribution of iron stores within tissues and organs of a multicellular organism.
0097009	name:Name:energy homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the balance between food intake (energy input) and energy expenditure.
0050817	name:Name:coagulation	name:Synonym:clotting	info:Definition:The process in which a fluid solution, or part of it, changes into a solid or semisolid mass.
0007596	name:Name:blood coagulation	name:Synonym:blood clotting	info:Definition:The sequential process in which the multiple coagulation factors of the blood interact, ultimately resulting in the formation of an insoluble fibrin clot; it may be divided into three stages: stage 1, the formation of intrinsic and extrinsic prothrombin converting principle; stage 2, the formation of thrombin; stage 3, the formation of stable fibrin polymers.
0050878	name:Name:regulation of body fluid levels	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the levels of body fluids.
0007589	name:Name:body fluid secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a fluid by a cell or group of cells in an animal.
0033326	name:Name:cerebrospinal fluid secretion	name:Synonym:CSF secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the choroid plexus of the lateral, third and fourth ventricles. The cerebrospinal fluid is a clear liquid that located within the ventricles, spinal canal, and subarachnoid spaces.
0070075	name:Name:tear secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of the aqueous layer of the tear film from the lacrimal glands. Tears are the liquid product of a process of lacrimation to clean and lubricate the eyes. Tear fluid contains water, mucin, lipids, lysozyme, lactoferrin, lipocalin, lacritin, immunoglobulins, glucose, urea, sodium, and potassium.
0070254	name:Name:mucus secretion	name:Synonym:mucus production	info:Definition:The regulated release of mucus by the mucosa. Mucus is a viscous slimy secretion consisting of mucins and various inorganic salts dissolved in water, with suspended epithelial cells and leukocytes. The mucosa, or mucous membrane, is the membrane covered with epithelium that lines the tubular organs of the body. Mucins are carbohydrate-rich glycoproteins that have a lubricating and protective function.
0007599	name:Name:hemostasis	info:Definition:The stopping of bleeding (loss of body fluid) or the arrest of the circulation to an organ or part.
0050891	name:Name:multicellular organismal water homeostasis	name:Synonym:body fluid osmoregulation	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of water within a tissue, organ, or a multicellular organism.
0033561	name:Name:regulation of water loss via skin	name:Synonym:skin barrier function	info:Definition:A process that modulates the rate or extent of water loss from an organism via the skin.
0050879	name:Name:multicellular organismal movement	info:Definition:Any physiological process involved in changing the position of a multicellular organism or an anatomical part of a multicellular organism.
0010031	name:Name:circumnutation	info:Definition:The organismal movement by which the tip of a plant organ follows a spiral pattern as a consequence of growth.
0050881	name:Name:musculoskeletal movement	info:Definition:The movement of an organism or part of an organism using mechanoreceptors, the nervous system, striated muscle and/or the skeletal system.
0050882	name:Name:voluntary musculoskeletal movement	info:Definition:The movement of an organism or part of an organism using mechanoreceptors, the nervous system, striated muscle and/or the skeletal system that can be controlled at will.
0050883	name:Name:musculoskeletal movement, spinal reflex action	info:Definition:Involuntary movement caused by the application of a stimulus to an organism and a subsequent movement. The signal processing of this movement takes place in the spinal cord.
0071965	name:Name:multicellular organismal locomotion	info:Definition:Locomotion in a multicellular organism, i.e. self-propelled movement of a multicellular organism from one location to another.
0055127	name:Name:vibrational conductance of sound to the inner ear	info:Definition:The transmission of vibrations via ossicles to the inner ear.
0071827	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle organization	info:Definition:A protein-lipid complex subunit organization process that results in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a plasma lipoprotein particle. A plasma lipoprotein particle is a spherical particle with a hydrophobic core of triglycerides and/or cholesterol esters, surrounded by an amphipathic monolayer of phospholipids, cholesterol and apolipoproteins.
0034369	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle remodeling	info:Definition:The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a plasma lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the esterification of cholesterol by phosphatidylcholine-sterol O-acyltransferase (lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase; LCAT).
0034370	name:Name:triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle remodeling	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein particle remodeling	info:Definition:The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by lipoprotein lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the transfer of cholesterol esters to a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), with the simultaneous transfer of triglyceride from a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle.
0034374	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein particle remodeling	name:Synonym:LDL remodeling	name:Synonym:small dense LDL formation	name:Synonym:small dense low-density lipoprotein particle formation	info:Definition:The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a low-density lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the transfer of cholesterol esters from LDL to a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), with the simultaneous transfer of triglyceride to LDL.
0034375	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle remodeling	name:Synonym:HDL remodeling	info:Definition:The acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a high-density lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase, with the subsequent loss of free fatty acid, and the transfer of cholesterol esters from LDL to a triglyceride-rich lipoprotein particle by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), with the simultaneous transfer of triglyceride to LDL.
0034377	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids to form a plasma lipoprotein particle.
0034378	name:Name:chylomicron assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids in the intestine to form a chylomicron.
0034379	name:Name:very-low-density lipoprotein particle assembly	name:Synonym:VLDL assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids in the liver to form a very-low-density lipoprotein particle.
0034380	name:Name:high-density lipoprotein particle assembly	name:Synonym:HDL assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids to form a high-density lipoprotein particle.
0071829	name:Name:plasma lipoprotein particle disassembly	info:Definition:The disaggregation of a plasma lipoprotein particle into its constituent components.
0090121	name:Name:low-density lipoprotein particle disassembly involved in cholesterol transport	info:Definition:The disassembly into constituent parts of the low-density lipoprotein particle in the lysosome that contributes to cholesterol transport.
0090130	name:Name:tissue migration	info:Definition:The process in which the population of cells that make up a tissue undergo directed movement.
0007509	name:Name:mesoderm migration involved in gastrulation	info:Definition:The migration of mesodermal cells during gastrulation to help establish the multilayered body plan of the organism.
0090131	name:Name:mesenchyme migration	info:Definition:The process in which the population of cells that make up a mesenchyme undergo directed movement.
0035322	name:Name:mesenchymal cell migration involved in limb bud formation	info:Definition:The orderly movement of a mesenchymal cell from one site to another that will contribute to the formation of a limb bud.
0090132	name:Name:epithelium migration	info:Definition:The process in which the population of cells that make up an epithelium undergo directed movement.
0090133	name:Name:mesendoderm migration	info:Definition:The process in which the population of cells that make up a mesendoderm undergo directed movement. The mesendoderm is the epithelial tissue that gives rise to both mesoderm and endoderm.
0090252	name:Name:epithelium migration involved in imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the population of cells that make up a wing epithelium undergo directed movement and contribute to imaginal disc-derived morphogenesis.
0032502	name:Name:developmental process	name:Synonym:development	info:Definition:A biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of an integrated living unit: an anatomical structure (which may be a subcellular structure, cell, tissue, or organ), or organism over time from an initial condition to a later condition.
0007389	name:Name:pattern specification process	name:Synonym:pattern biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pattern formation	info:Definition:Any developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within an organism to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate.
0003002	name:Name:regionalization	name:Synonym:pattern formation	info:Definition:The pattern specification process that results in the subdivision of an axis or axes in space to define an area or volume in which specific patterns of cell differentiation will take place or in which cells interpret a specific environment.
0007351	name:Name:tripartite regional subdivision	info:Definition:Subdivision of the embryo along the anterior/posterior axis into anterior, posterior and terminal regions.
0007365	name:Name:periodic partitioning	info:Definition:The regionalization process that divides the spatial regions of an embryo into serially repeated regions.
0007371	name:Name:ventral midline determination	name:Synonym:determination of anterior border of ventral midline	name:Synonym:determination of posterior border of ventral midline	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the area where the ventral midline will form is specified.
0007447	name:Name:imaginal disc pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that results in defined areas of the imaginal disc that will undergo specific cell differentaiton. Imaginal discs are epithelial infoldings in the larvae of holometabolous insects that develop into adult appendages (legs, antennae, wings, etc.) during metamorphosis from larval to adult form.
0007474	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing vein specification	name:Synonym:wing vein specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the area of a imaginal disc-derived wing that will form a wing vein is specified.
0009952	name:Name:anterior/posterior pattern formation	name:Synonym:anterior/posterior pattern specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which specific areas of cell differentiation are determined along the anterior-posterior axis. The anterior-posterior axis is defined by a line that runs from the head or mouth of an organism to the tail or opposite end of the organism.
0009953	name:Name:dorsal/ventral pattern formation	name:Synonym:dorsal-ventral pattern formation	name:Synonym:dorsal/ventral pattern specification	name:Synonym:dorsoventral pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the areas along the dorsal/ventral axis are established that will lead to differences in cell differentiation. The dorsal/ventral axis is defined by a line that runs orthogonal to both the anterior/posterior and left/right axes. The dorsal end is defined by the upper or back side of an organism. The ventral end is defined by the lower or front side of an organism.
0009954	name:Name:proximal/distal pattern formation	name:Synonym:proximal/distal pattern specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which specific areas of cell differentiation are determined along a proximal/distal axis. The proximal/distal axis is defined by a line that runs from main body (proximal end) of an organism outward (distal end).
0009955	name:Name:adaxial/abaxial pattern formation	name:Synonym:adaxial/abaxial pattern specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which differences in cell differentiation along the adaxial/abaxial are generated. Adaxial refers to being situated toward an axis of an anatomical structure. Abaxial refers to being situated away from an axis of an anatomical structure.
0009956	name:Name:radial pattern formation	name:Synonym:radial pattern specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process that results in defined areas around a point in which specific types of cell differentiation will occur.
0010051	name:Name:xylem and phloem pattern formation	name:Synonym:vascular tissue pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that gives rise to the patterning of the conducting tissues. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010092	name:Name:specification of organ identity	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the identity of an organ primordium is specified. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0010159	name:Name:specification of organ position	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which information that determines the correct position at which organ primordia are formed is generated and perceived resulting in correct positioning of the new organ.
0010160	name:Name:formation of organ boundary	name:Synonym:organ boundary specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process that specifies organ primordium boundaries resulting in a restriction of organogenesis to a limited spatial domain and keeping the organ separate from surrounding tissues.
0010375	name:Name:stomatal complex patterning	info:Definition:The regionalization process of establishing the non-random spatial arrangement of stomatal complex on the surface of a leaf. The stomatal complex is the stomatal guard cells and their associated epidermal cells.
0021511	name:Name:spinal cord patterning	info:Definition:The regionalization process that regulates the coordinated growth and establishes the non-random spatial arrangement of the spinal cord.
0021532	name:Name:neural tube patterning	info:Definition:The regionalization process that regulates the coordinated growth that establishes the non-random spatial arrangement of the neural tube.
0021547	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary initiation	name:Synonym:isthmus biosynthesis	name:Synonym:isthmus formation	name:Synonym:MHB biosynthesis	name:Synonym:MHB formation	name:Synonym:midbrain-hindbrain boundary biosynthesis	name:Synonym:midbrain-hindbrain boundary formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that gives rise to the midbrain-hindbrain boundary. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0021796	name:Name:cerebral cortex regionalization	name:Synonym:cerebral cortex arealization	name:Synonym:cerebral cortex pattern biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cerebral cortex pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that results in the creation of areas within the cerebral cortex that will direct the behavior of cell migration and differentiation as the cortex develops.
0021871	name:Name:forebrain regionalization	info:Definition:The regionalization process resulting in the creation of areas within the forebrain that will direct the behavior of cell migration in differentiation as the forebrain develops.
0021978	name:Name:telencephalon regionalization	info:Definition:The regionalization process that creates areas within the forebrain that will direct the behavior of cell migration in differentiation as the telencephalon develops.
0035017	name:Name:cuticle pattern formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that gives rise to the patterns of cell differentiation in the cuticle.
0035282	name:Name:segmentation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that divides an organism or part of an organism into a series of semi-repetitive parts, or segments, often arranged along a longitudinal axis.
0035309	name:Name:wing and notum subfield formation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that subdivides the wing imaginal disc into the wing and notum (body wall) subfields, thus determining whether cells ultimately differentiate wing or notum-specific structures.
0045470	name:Name:R8 cell-mediated photoreceptor organization	name:Synonym:R8-mediated photoreceptor organisation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that coordinates the recruitment and organization of other non-R8 photoreceptors by the R8 photoreceptor.
0048264	name:Name:determination of ventral identity	name:Synonym:determination of abaxial identity	info:Definition:The regionalization process that results in the determination of the identity of part of an organism or organ where those parts are of the type that occur in the ventral region. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0048629	name:Name:trichome patterning	name:Synonym:trichome distribution	name:Synonym:trichome pattern biosynthesis	name:Synonym:trichome pattern formation	name:Synonym:trichome pattern specification	name:Synonym:trichome spacing	info:Definition:The regionalization process of establishing the non-random spatial arrangement of trichomes on the surface and margin of a leaf. Process involves signaling between adjacent epidermal cells that results in differentiation of some epidermal cells into trichomes.
0048832	name:Name:specification of organ number	info:Definition:The regionalization process that modulates the quantity of a particular type of organ.
0060877	name:Name:regionalization involved in semicircular canal formation	info:Definition:The pattern specification process that results in the subdivision of the otic epithelium in space to define an area or volume in which cells will differentiate to give rise to the semicircular canals.
0060888	name:Name:limb epidermis stratification	info:Definition:The pattern specification process that results in the subdivision of the epidermis of the limb in space to define a volume in which specific patterns of basal cell, spinous cell and granular cells will differentiate giving rise to the layers of the limb epidermis.
0060897	name:Name:neural plate regionalization	info:Definition:The pattern specification process that results in the subdivision of an axis or axes of the neural plate in space to define an area or volume in which specific patterns of cell differentiation will take place or in which cells interpret a specific environment.
0060972	name:Name:left/right pattern formation	info:Definition:The pattern specification process that results in the subdivision of the left/right axis in space to define an area or volume in which specific patterns of cell differentiation will take place or in which cells interpret a specific environment.
0061139	name:Name:bud field specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the identity of a bud primordium is specified. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0072130	name:Name:renal capsule specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the identity of the renal capsule is specified. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0080172	name:Name:petal epidermis patterning	info:Definition:The regionalization process that regulates the coordinated growth and establishes the non-random spatial arrangement of the cells in the petal epidermis.
0007379	name:Name:segment specification	info:Definition:The process in which segments assume individual identities; exemplified in insects by the actions of the products of the homeotic genes.
0001757	name:Name:somite specification	info:Definition:The process in which individual somites establish identity during embryogenesis.
0007380	name:Name:specification of segmental identity, head	info:Definition:The specification of the characteristic structures of the head segments following establishment of segment boundaries. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0035292	name:Name:specification of segmental identity, trunk	info:Definition:The specification of the characteristic structures of trunk segments, following establishment of segment boundaries. In Drosophila, the trunk segments include thoracic segments and abdominal segments A1 to A8. Identity is considered to be the aggregate of characteristics by which a structure is recognized.
0072081	name:Name:specification of nephron tubule identity	info:Definition:The process in which the tubules arranged along the proximal/distal axis of the nephron acquire their identity.
0009798	name:Name:axis specification	name:Synonym:axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of a pattern along a line or around a point.
0000578	name:Name:embryonic axis specification	name:Synonym:embryonic axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of a pattern along a line or a point in an embryo.
0003421	name:Name:growth plate cartilage axis specification	name:Synonym:growth plate cartilage axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the columnar cartilage along the axis of a long bone that contributes to bone growth.
0009943	name:Name:adaxial/abaxial axis specification	name:Synonym:adaxial/abaxial determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the adaxial / abaxial axis. Adaxial refers to being situated toward an axis of an anatomical structure. Abaxial refers to being situated away from an axis of an anatomical structure.
0009945	name:Name:radial axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of an axis that initiates at a point and radiates outward from the point.
0009946	name:Name:proximal/distal axis specification	name:Synonym:proximal/distal axis determination	name:Synonym:proximodistal axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the proximal/distal axis. The proximal/distal axis is defined by a line that runs from main body (proximal end) of an organism outward (distal end).
0009947	name:Name:centrolateral axis specification	name:Synonym:centrolateral axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the centrolateral axis. In plants, this axis is duplicated and runs from the midrib to the margin of the leaf.
0009948	name:Name:anterior/posterior axis specification	name:Synonym:anterior/posterior axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the anterior/posterior axis. The anterior-posterior axis is defined by a line that runs from the head or mouth of an organism to the tail or opposite end of the organism.
0009950	name:Name:dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:dorsal-ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:dorsal/ventral axis determination	name:Synonym:dorsoventral axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the dorsal/ventral axis. The dorsal/ventral axis is defined by a line that runs orthogonal to both the anterior/posterior and left/right axes. The dorsal end is defined by the upper or back side of an organism. The ventral end is defined by the lower or front side of an organism.
0048560	name:Name:establishment of anatomical structure orientation	info:Definition:The process that determines the orientation of an anatomical structure with reference to an axis.
0070986	name:Name:left/right axis specification	name:Synonym:left-right axis specification	name:Synonym:left/right axis determination	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the left/right axis. The left/right axis is defined by a line that runs orthogonal to both the anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral axes. Each side is defined from the viewpoint of the organism rather of the observer (as per anatomical axes).
0009799	name:Name:specification of symmetry	name:Synonym:determination of symmetry	name:Synonym:specification of symmetry	info:Definition:The establishment of an organism's body plan or part of an organism such that a similar arrangement in form and relationship of parts around a common axis, or around each side of a plane is created.
0009855	name:Name:determination of bilateral symmetry	name:Synonym:determination of bilateral asymmetry	info:Definition:The establishment of an organism's body plan or part of an organism with respect to a single longitudinal plane. The pattern can either be symmetric, such that the halves are mirror images, or asymmetric where the pattern deviates from this symmetry.
0009879	name:Name:determination of radial symmetry	name:Synonym:determination of radial asymmetry	info:Definition:The establishment of an organism's body plan or a part of an organism such that it is symmetric around a central axis.
0072100	name:Name:specification of ureteric bud anterior/posterior symmetry	name:Synonym:specification of ureteric bud anterior/posterior asymmetry	info:Definition:The establishment of the ureteric bud such that there is a similar arrangement in form and relationship of parts along its anterior/posterior axis.
0009880	name:Name:embryonic pattern specification	name:Synonym:embryonic pattern biosynthesis	name:Synonym:embryonic pattern formation	name:Synonym:ventral/lateral system	info:Definition:The process that results in the patterns of cell differentiation that will arise in an embryo.
0007350	name:Name:blastoderm segmentation	info:Definition:The hierarchical steps resulting in the progressive subdivision of the anterior/posterior axis of the embryo.
0007362	name:Name:terminal region determination	info:Definition:Specification of the terminal regions (the two non-segmented ends) of the embryo by the gap genes; exemplified in insects by the actions of huckebein and tailless gene products.
0016318	name:Name:ommatidial rotation	info:Definition:The process in which photoreceptors are arranged in ommatidia in the dorsal and ventral fields to be mirror images. The polarity is established in the imaginal discs concurrently with cell fate specification.
0035161	name:Name:imaginal disc lineage restriction	info:Definition:Formation and/or maintenance of a lineage boundary between compartments in an imaginal disc that cells cannot cross, thus separating the populations of cells in each compartment.
0007451	name:Name:dorsal/ventral lineage restriction, imaginal disc	name:Synonym:dorsal-ventral lineage restriction, imaginal disc	name:Synonym:dorsoventral lineage restriction, imaginal disc	info:Definition:Formation and/or maintenance of a lineage boundary between dorsal and ventral compartments that cells cannot cross, thus separating the populations of cells in each compartment.
0048099	name:Name:anterior/posterior lineage restriction, imaginal disc	info:Definition:Formation and/or maintenance of a lineage boundary between anterior and posterior compartments that cells cannot cross, thus separating the populations of cells in each compartment.
0035287	name:Name:head segmentation	info:Definition:Partitioning the head anlage into a fixed number of segmental units. The number of segments composing the insect head has long been a subject of debate, but it is generally agreed that there are 6 or 7 segments. From anterior to posterior the head segments are the procephalic segments (labral, (ocular), antennal and intercalary) and the gnathal segments (mandibular, maxillary and labial).
0035288	name:Name:anterior head segmentation	name:Synonym:procephalic segmentation	info:Definition:Partitioning the head anlage into procephalic (labral, (ocular), antennal and intercalary) segments. The procephalic segments lie anterior to the gnathal (posterior head) segments, and are pattered by different segmentation gene cascades to the abdominal, thoracic and posterior head (gnathal) segments.
0035289	name:Name:posterior head segmentation	name:Synonym:gnathal segmentation	info:Definition:Partitioning the posterior region of the head anlage into gnathal (mandibular, maxillary and labial) segments. Unlike the anterior head (procephalic) segments, formation of the posterior head (gnathal) segments occurs by a similar mechanism to trunk segmentation, where a cascade of gap genes, pair-rule genes and segment-polarity genes subdivide the embryo into progressively smaller domains.
0045468	name:Name:regulation of R8 cell spacing in compound eye	name:Synonym:R8 cell spacing in compound eye	name:Synonym:regulation of R8 spacing	info:Definition:Any process that ensures that the R8 cells are selected in a precise progressive pattern so that they are evenly spaced throughout the eye disc.
0045469	name:Name:negative regulation of R8 cell spacing in compound eye	name:Synonym:down regulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:down-regulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:downregulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:inhibition of R8 spacing	info:Definition:Any process that stops or prevents the correct R8 cell spacing pattern in a compound eye.
0045748	name:Name:positive regulation of R8 cell spacing in compound eye	name:Synonym:activation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:positive regulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:stimulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:up regulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:up-regulation of R8 spacing	name:Synonym:upregulation of R8 spacing	info:Definition:Any process that activates or enforces the correct R8 cell spacing in a compound eye.
0060432	name:Name:lung pattern specification process	info:Definition:Any developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within the lung, to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate.
0061115	name:Name:lung proximal/distal axis specification	info:Definition:The establishment, maintenance and elaboration of the proximal/distal axis of the lung. The proximal/distal axis of the lung is defined by a line that runs from the trachea to the alveoli.
0060854	name:Name:patterning of lymph vessels	info:Definition:The process that regulates the coordinated growth and sprouting of lymph vessels giving rise to the organized lymphatic system.
0060896	name:Name:neural plate pattern specification	info:Definition:The developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within the neural plate to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate.
0065001	name:Name:specification of axis polarity	info:Definition:The pattern specification process in which the polarity of a body or organ axis is established and maintained.
0009944	name:Name:polarity specification of adaxial/abaxial axis	info:Definition:The process resulting in the establishment of polarity along the adaxial/abaxial axis. Adaxial refers to being situated toward an axis of an anatomical structure. Abaxial refers to being situated away from an axis of an anatomical structure.
0009949	name:Name:polarity specification of anterior/posterior axis	info:Definition:Any process resulting in the establishment of polarity along the anterior/posterior axis.
0009951	name:Name:polarity specification of dorsal/ventral axis	name:Synonym:polarity specification of dorsal-ventral axis	name:Synonym:polarity specification of dorsoventral axis	info:Definition:Any process resulting in the establishment of polarity along the dorsal/ventral axis.
0010084	name:Name:specification of organ axis polarity	info:Definition:The process in which the polarity of an organ axis is specified.
0010085	name:Name:polarity specification of proximal/distal axis	info:Definition:Any process resulting in the establishment of polarity along the proximal/distal axis.
0072048	name:Name:renal system pattern specification	name:Synonym:renal system pattern formation	info:Definition:Any developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within an organism to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate into the anatomical structures of the renal system.
0061004	name:Name:pattern specification involved in kidney development	name:Synonym:kidney pattern formation	name:Synonym:kidney pattern specification	name:Synonym:pattern formation involved in kidney development	info:Definition:Any developmental process that results in the creation of defined areas or spaces within the kidney to which cells respond and eventually are instructed to differentiate.
0061150	name:Name:renal system segmentation	name:Synonym:urinary tract segmentation	info:Definition:The regionalization process that divides an the renal system into a series of segments along its proximal/distal axis.
0072188	name:Name:metanephric cap specification	info:Definition:The process in which the metanephric cap acquires its identity.
0080006	name:Name:internode patterning	info:Definition:Determines the spacing between two shoot nodes. A shoot node is the region of the shoot where the spikelet, flower, floret, branch, bud and/or leaves are attached.
0007568	name:Name:aging	name:Synonym:ageing	info:Definition:The inherent decline over time, from the optimal fertility and viability of early maturity, that may precede death and may be preceded by other indications, such as sterility.
0010259	name:Name:multicellular organismal aging	info:Definition:The inherent decline of a multicellular organism over time, from the optimal fertility and viability of early maturity, that may precede death and may be preceded by other indications, such as sterility.
0010260	name:Name:organ senescence	info:Definition:The process that occurs in an organ near the end of its active life that is associated with the dismantling of cell components and membranes, and an overall decline in metabolism. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010150	name:Name:leaf senescence	info:Definition:The process that occurs in a leaf near the end of its active life that is associated with the dismantling of cell components and membranes, loss of functional chloroplasts, and an overall decline in metabolism.
0007571	name:Name:age-dependent general metabolic decline	name:Synonym:age-dependent decreased translational activity	name:Synonym:age-dependent increased protein content	name:Synonym:age-dependent yeast cell size increase	name:Synonym:nucleolar size increase	info:Definition:A developmental process that arises as the cell progresses toward the end of its lifespan and cause changes cellular metabolism, resulting in a decline in cell function; for example, one aspect of general metabolic decline is a decrease in the efficiency of protein synthesis.
0001321	name:Name:age-dependent general metabolic decline involved in replicative cell aging	name:Synonym:age-dependent general metabolic decline during replicative cell ageing	name:Synonym:age-dependent general metabolic decline involved in replicative cell aging	info:Definition:A process of general metabolic decline that arises in dividing cells as they age, and alters cellular metabolism to cause a decline in cell function.
0001323	name:Name:age-dependent general metabolic decline involved in chronological cell aging	name:Synonym:age-dependent general metabolic decline during chronological cell ageing	name:Synonym:age-dependent general metabolic decline during chronological cell aging	info:Definition:A process of general metabolic decline that arises in non-dividing cells as they age, and alters cellular metabolism to cause a decline in cell function.
0009561	name:Name:megagametogenesis	name:Synonym:embryo sac development from the megaspore	name:Synonym:megagametophyte nucleus division	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryo sac over time, from its formation as the megaspore to the mature structure. The process begins when three of the four haploid megaspores disintegrate, and the fourth undergoes mitosis giving rise to a binucleate syncytial embryo sac. The two haploid nuclei migrate to the opposite poles of the embryo sac and then undergo two rounds of mitosis generating four haploid nuclei at each pole. One nucleus from each set of four migrates to the center of the cell. Cellularization occurs, resulting in an eight-nucleate seven-celled structure. This structure contains two synergid cells and an egg cell at the micropylar end, and three antipodal cells at the other end. A binucleate endosperm mother cell is formed at the center.
0009653	name:Name:anatomical structure morphogenesis	name:Synonym:anatomical structure organization	name:Synonym:embryogenesis and morphogenesis	name:Synonym:morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized. Morphogenesis pertains to the creation of form.
0001946	name:Name:lymphangiogenesis	name:Synonym:lymph vessel formation	info:Definition:Lymph vessel formation when new vessels emerge from the proliferation of pre-existing vessels.
0002089	name:Name:lens morphogenesis in camera-type eye	name:Synonym:lens morphogenesis	name:Synonym:lens morphogenesis in camera-style eye	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the lens are generated and organized. The lens is a transparent structure in the eye through which light is focused onto the retina. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0003142	name:Name:cardiogenic plate morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cardiac crescent morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the cardiogenic plate are generated and organized. The cardiogenic plate is the first recognizable structure derived from the heart field.
0003149	name:Name:membranous septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the membranous septum is generated and organized. The membranous septum is the upper part of ventricular septum.
0003150	name:Name:muscular septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the muscular septum is generated and organized. The muscular septum is the lower part of the ventricular septum.
0003151	name:Name:outflow tract morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the outflow tract are generated and organized. The outflow tract is the portion of the heart through which blood flows into the arteries.
0003160	name:Name:endocardium morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the endocardium is generated and organized. The endocardium is an anatomical structure comprised of an endothelium and an extracellular matrix that forms the innermost layer of tissue of the heart, and lines the heart chambers.
0003179	name:Name:heart valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of a heart valve is generated and organized.
0003180	name:Name:aortic valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the aortic valve is generated and organized.
0003181	name:Name:atrioventricular valve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:AV valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the atrioventricular valve is generated and organized.
0003182	name:Name:coronary sinus valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the coronary sinus valve is generated and organized.
0003183	name:Name:mitral valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the mitral valve is generated and organized.
0003184	name:Name:pulmonary valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the pulmonary valve is generated and organized.
0003185	name:Name:sinoatrial valve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:SA valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the sinoatrial valve is generated and organized.
0003186	name:Name:tricuspid valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the tricuspid valve is generated and organized.
0003187	name:Name:ventriculo bulbo valve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the structure of the ventriculo bulbo valve is generated and organized.
0003206	name:Name:cardiac chamber morphogenesis	name:Synonym:heart chamber morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a cardiac chamber is generated and organized. A cardiac chamber is an enclosed cavity within the heart.
0003208	name:Name:cardiac ventricle morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the cardiac ventricle is generated and organized. A cardiac ventricle receives blood from a cardiac atrium and pumps it out of the heart.
0003209	name:Name:cardiac atrium morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the cardiac atrium is generated and organized. A cardiac atrium receives blood from a vein and pumps it to a cardiac ventricle.
0003233	name:Name:bulbus arteriosus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the bulbus arteriosus is generated and organized. The bulbus arteriosus is an elastic cardiac chamber.
0003236	name:Name:sinus venosus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the sinus venosus is generated and organized. The sinus venosus is a heart chamber attached to the atrium on the venous side of the embryonic heart.
0003239	name:Name:conus arteriosus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the conus arteriosus is generated and organized. The conus arteriosus is a valved chamber with thick muscular walls stemming from the ventricle and connecting to the pulmonary trunk.
0007164	name:Name:establishment of tissue polarity	info:Definition:Coordinated organization of groups of cells in a tissue, such that they all orient to similar coordinates.
0001736	name:Name:establishment of planar polarity	name:Synonym:establishment of planar cell polarity	info:Definition:Coordinated organization of groups of cells in the plane of an epithelium, such that they all orient to similar coordinates.
0007440	name:Name:foregut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the foregut are generated and organized.
0007442	name:Name:hindgut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hindgut are generated and organized.
0007552	name:Name:metamorphosis	info:Definition:A biological process in which an animal physically develops after birth or hatching, involving a conspicuous and relatively abrupt change in the animal's form or structure. Examples include the change from tadpole to frog, and the change from larva to adult. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0009886	name:Name:post-embryonic morphogenesis	name:Synonym:post-embryonic morphogenesis of an anatomical structure	info:Definition:The process, occurring after embryonic development, by which anatomical structures are generated and organized.
0001737	name:Name:establishment of imaginal disc-derived wing hair orientation	name:Synonym:establishment of wing hair orientation	info:Definition:Orientation of hairs in the imaginal disc-derived wing along a proximal-distal axis, such that each cell of the wing produces one wing hair which points in a distal direction.
0007436	name:Name:larval salivary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the larva, by which the anatomical structures of the salivary gland are generated and organized.
0007475	name:Name:apposition of dorsal and ventral imaginal disc-derived wing surfaces	name:Synonym:apposition of dorsal and ventral wing surfaces	info:Definition:The coming together of the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the imaginal disc-derived wing during the conversion of a folded single layered wing disc to a flat bilayered wing.
0007490	name:Name:tergite morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the tergite are generated and organized. The tergite is the primary plate or sclerite forming the dorsal surface of any insect body segment.
0007491	name:Name:sternite morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the sternite are generated and organized. The sternite is the plate or sclerite on the underside of a body segment.
0007561	name:Name:imaginal disc eversion	info:Definition:The eversion (turning inside out) of imaginal discs from their peripodial sacs, resulting in movement of the epithelium to the outside of the larval epidermis.
0008586	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing vein morphogenesis	name:Synonym:wing vein morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures of the veins on an imaginal disc-derived wing are generated and organized.
0008587	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing margin morphogenesis	name:Synonym:wing margin morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the imaginal disc-derived wing margin are generated and organized. The wing margin is a strip of cells in the third instar disc at the boundary between the presumptive dorsal and ventral surfaces of the wing blade.
0009878	name:Name:nodule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the nodule are generated and organized.
0010101	name:Name:post-embryonic root morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the post-embryonic root are generated and organized. The post-embryonic root is the root formed after the embryonic phase has been completed.
0010103	name:Name:stomatal complex morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the stomatal complex are generated and organized. The stomatal complex is the stomatal guard cells and their associated epidermal cells.
0010442	name:Name:guard cell morphogenesis	name:Synonym:guard cell morphogenesis during differentiation	info:Definition:Generation and organization of the polarized cell that is capable of turgor driven movement.
0010782	name:Name:proboscis morphogenesis, labial disc-derived	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the proboscis that are derived from the labial disc are generated and organized.
0010783	name:Name:proboscis morphogenesis, eye-antennal disc-derived	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the proboscis that are derived from the eye-antennal disc are generated and organized.
0010784	name:Name:proboscis morphogenesis, clypeo-labral disc-derived	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the proboscis that are derived from the clypeo-labral disc are generated and organized.
0016335	name:Name:morphogenesis of larval imaginal disc epithelium	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a larval imaginal disc epithelium are generated and organized.
0016348	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived leg joint morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of an imaginal disc-derived leg joint are generated and organized. The leg joint is a flexible region that separates the rigid sections of a leg to allow movement in a controlled manner. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035120	name:Name:post-embryonic appendage morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring after embryonic development, by which the anatomical structures of an appendage are generated and organized. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism, such as a limb or a branch.
0035193	name:Name:larval central nervous system remodeling	name:Synonym:central nervous system metamorphosis	name:Synonym:CNS metamorphosis	info:Definition:Reorganization of the pre-existing, functional larval central nervous system into one that can serve the novel behavioral needs of the adult. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035318	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing hair outgrowth	name:Synonym:wing hair outgrowth	name:Synonym:wing prehair outgrowth	info:Definition:Extrusion of a cellular projection from the apical membrane of an epithelial cell in an imaginal disc-derived wing. Outgrowth initiates approximately 35 hours after puparium formation from the distal side of the cell, and at this stage the cellular extension is termed a prehair.
0035319	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing hair elongation	name:Synonym:wing hair elongation	name:Synonym:wing prehair extension	info:Definition:Growth of a prehair in the approximately 10 hour period following its emergence from an epidermal cell in an imaginal disc-derived wing. Prehair elongation is guided and/or driven by the polymerization of actin filaments and the orderly crosslinking of filaments into bundles.
0040032	name:Name:post-embryonic body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the post-embryonic soma are generated and organized.
0046528	name:Name:imaginal disc fusion	info:Definition:The process following disc eversion whereby imaginal discs fuse with adjacent disc derivatives to form a continuous adult epidermis.
0046529	name:Name:imaginal disc fusion, thorax closure	info:Definition:The joining of the parts of the wing imaginal discs, giving rise to the adult thorax.
0048563	name:Name:post-embryonic organ morphogenesis	info:Definition:Morphogenesis, during the post-embryonic phase, of a tissue or tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Morphogenesis pertains to process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0048614	name:Name:post-embryonic ectodermal digestive tract morphogenesis	name:Synonym:post-embryonic ectodermal gut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring during the post-embryonic phase, by which the anatomical structures of the ectodermal gut are generated and organized.
0048616	name:Name:post-embryonic anterior midgut (ectodermal) morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the anterior midgut (ectodermal) are generated and organized, during the post-embryonic phase.
0048618	name:Name:post-embryonic foregut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the foregut are generated and organized, during the post-embryonic phase.
0048620	name:Name:post-embryonic hindgut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hindgut are generated and organized, during the post-embryonic phase.
0048621	name:Name:post-embryonic digestive tract morphogenesis	name:Synonym:post-embryonic gut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring during the post-embryonic phase, by which the anatomical structures of the digestive tract are generated and organized. The digestive tract is the anatomical structure through which food passes and is processed.
0048707	name:Name:instar larval or pupal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring during instar larval or pupal development, by which anatomical structures are generated and organized.
0048716	name:Name:labrum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of labrum are generated and organized.
0048717	name:Name:anterior cibarial plate morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the anterior cibarial plate are generated and organized.
0048719	name:Name:epistomal sclerite morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the epistomal sclerite are generated and organized.
0048720	name:Name:posterior cibarial plate morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the posterior cibarial plate are generated and organized.
0048721	name:Name:clypeus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the clypeus are generated and organized.
0048800	name:Name:antennal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the antenna are generated and organized.
0048801	name:Name:antennal joint morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the antennal joint are generated and organized.
0048802	name:Name:notum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the dorsal part of the body are generated and organized.
0048809	name:Name:analia morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of analia are generated and organized. The analia is the posterior-most vertral appendage that develops from the genital disc. An example of this process is analia morphogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster.
0048816	name:Name:ocellus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the ocellus are generated and organized. The ocellus is a simple visual organ of insects.
0060060	name:Name:post-embryonic retina morphogenesis in camera-type eye	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the retina is generated and organized in a camera-type eye during the post-embryonic life stage.
0090253	name:Name:convergent extension involved in imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the wing epithelium narrows along one axis and lengthens in a perpendicular axis that contributes to imaginal disc-derived wing morphogenesis.
0009887	name:Name:organ morphogenesis	name:Synonym:histogenesis and organogenesis	info:Definition:Morphogenesis of an organ. An organ is defined as a tissue or set of tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Morphogenesis is the process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0003007	name:Name:heart morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cardiac morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the heart is generated and organized. The heart is a hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood.
0008407	name:Name:bristle morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the bristle are generated and organized.
0009965	name:Name:leaf morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the leaf are generated and organized.
0010433	name:Name:bract morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of a bract are generated and organized. A bract is a leaf, usually different in form from the foliage leaves, subtending a flower or inflorescence.
0031100	name:Name:organ regeneration	info:Definition:The regrowth of a lost or destroyed organ.
0035211	name:Name:spermathecum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a spermathecum, a sperm storage organ, are generated and organized. Paired spermathecae lie at the anterior end of the insect uterus on the dorsal side. Each spermatheca consists of an oval shaped capsule, connected to the uterus by a spermathecal stalk.
0035848	name:Name:oviduct morphogenesis	name:Synonym:fallopian tube morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures of the oviduct are generated and organized. An oviduct is a tube through which an ova passes from the ovary to the uterus, or from the ovary to the outside of the organism.
0042476	name:Name:odontogenesis	name:Synonym:odontogenesis of calcareous or chitinous tooth	name:Synonym:odontogeny	name:Synonym:odontosis	name:Synonym:tooth development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a tooth or teeth over time, from formation to the mature structure(s). A tooth is any hard bony, calcareous, or chitinous organ found in the mouth or pharynx of an animal and used in procuring or masticating food.
0043585	name:Name:nose morphogenesis	name:Synonym:nasus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the nose are generated and organized. The nose is the specialized structure of the face that serves as the organ of the sense of smell and as part of the respiratory system. Includes the nasi externus (external nose) and cavitas nasi (nasal cavity).
0043587	name:Name:tongue morphogenesis	name:Synonym:glossa morphogenesis	name:Synonym:lingua morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the tongue are generated and organized. The tongue is the movable, muscular organ on the floor of the mouth of most vertebrates, in man other mammals is the principal organ of taste, aids in the prehension of food, in swallowing, and in modifying the voice as in speech.
0048562	name:Name:embryonic organ morphogenesis	info:Definition:Morphogenesis, during the embryonic phase, of a tissue or tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Morphogenesis is the process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0048592	name:Name:eye morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the eye are generated and organized.
0048644	name:Name:muscle organ morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of muscle are generated and organized.
0048705	name:Name:skeletal system morphogenesis	name:Synonym:skeletal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the skeleton are generated and organized.
0048734	name:Name:proboscis morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the proboscis are generated and organized. The proboscis is the trunk-like extension of the mouthparts on the adult head.
0048795	name:Name:swim bladder morphogenesis	name:Synonym:gas bladder morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the swim bladder is generated and organized. The swim bladder is used by some fishes to maintain buoyancy and may function in addition as a sound producing organ, a sound receptor, and a respiratory organ.
0048854	name:Name:brain morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the brain are generated and organized. The brain is one of the two components of the central nervous system and is the center of thought and emotion. It is responsible for the coordination and control of bodily activities and the interpretation of information from the senses (sight, hearing, smell, etc.).
0060425	name:Name:lung morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the lung are generated and organized.
0060434	name:Name:bronchus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the bronchus is generated and organized. The bronchus is the portion of the airway that connects to the lungs.
0060439	name:Name:trachea morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a trachea is generated and organized. The trachea is the portion of the airway that attaches to the bronchi as it branches.
0060993	name:Name:kidney morphogenesis	info:Definition:Morphogenesis of a kidney. A kidney is an organ that filters the blood and excretes the end products of body metabolism in the form of urine.
0061113	name:Name:pancreas morphogenesis	info:Definition:Morphogenesis of the pancreas. Morphogenesis is the process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized.
0072197	name:Name:ureter morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the ureter are generated and organized. The ureter is a muscular tube that transports urine from the kidney to the urinary bladder.
0072576	name:Name:liver morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the liver are generated and organized.
0010015	name:Name:root morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of roots are generated and organized. The root is the usually underground part of a seed plant body that originates from the hypocotyl, functions as an organ of absorption, aeration, and food storage or as a means of anchorage and support.
0010086	name:Name:embryonic root morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the embryonic root are generated and organized.
0010016	name:Name:shoot morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the shoot are generated and organized. The shoot is the part of a seed plant body that is usually above ground.
0010064	name:Name:embryonic shoot morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of embryonic shoot are generated and organized.
0010171	name:Name:body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the soma are generated and organized.
0010172	name:Name:embryonic body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the embryonic soma are generated and organized.
0021551	name:Name:central nervous system morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the central nervous system is generated and organized. The central nervous system is the core nervous system that serves an integrating and coordinating function. In vertebrates it consists of the brain, spinal cord and spinal nerves. In those invertebrates with a central nervous system it typically consists of a brain, cerebral ganglia and a nerve cord.
0021575	name:Name:hindbrain morphogenesis	name:Synonym:rhombencephalon morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the hindbrain is generated and organized. The hindbrain is the region consisting of the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Areas of the hindbrain control motor and autonomic functions.
0021579	name:Name:medulla oblongata morphogenesis	name:Synonym:medulla morphogenesis	name:Synonym:myelencephalon morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the medulla oblongata is generated and organized. The medulla oblongata lies directly above the spinal cord and controls vital autonomic functions such as digestion, breathing and the control of heart rate.
0021583	name:Name:pons morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the pons is generated and organized. The pons lies above the medulla and next to the cerebellum. The pons conveys information about movement from the cerebral hemisphere to the cerebellum.
0021587	name:Name:cerebellum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cerebellum is generated and organized. The cerebellum is the portion of the brain in the back of the head between the cerebrum and the pons. The cerebellum controls balance for walking and standing, modulates the force and range of movement and is involved in the learning of motor skills.
0021593	name:Name:rhombomere morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the rhombomere is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates.
0021651	name:Name:rhombomere 1 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 1 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021655	name:Name:rhombomere 2 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 2 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021658	name:Name:rhombomere 3 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 3 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021661	name:Name:rhombomere 4 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 4 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021664	name:Name:rhombomere 5 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of rhombomere 5 are generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021667	name:Name:rhombomere 6 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 6 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021671	name:Name:rhombomere 7 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 7 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021674	name:Name:rhombomere 8 morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of rhombomere 8 is generated and organized. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021602	name:Name:cranial nerve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cranial nerves are generated and organized. The cranial nerves are composed of twelve pairs of nerves that emanate from the nervous tissue of the hindbrain. These nerves are sensory, motor, or mixed in nature, and provide the motor and general sensory innervation of the head, neck and viscera. They mediate vision, hearing, olfaction and taste and carry the parasympathetic innervation of the autonomic ganglia that control visceral functions.
0021598	name:Name:abducens nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN VI development	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the abducens nerve is generated and organized. The motor function of the abducens nerve is to contract the lateral rectus which results in abduction of the eye.
0021607	name:Name:accessory nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN XI morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the accessory nerve is generated and organized. The spinal branch of this motor nerve innervates the trapezius and the sternocleidomastoid muscles. The cranial branch joins the vagus nerve and innervates the same targets as the vagus nerve.
0021610	name:Name:facial nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN VII morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the facial nerve is generated and organized. This sensory and motor nerve supplies the muscles of facial expression and the expression and taste at the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The principal branches are the superficial opthalmic, buccal, palatine and hyomandibular. The main trunk synapses within pterygopalatine ganglion in the parotid gland and this ganglion then gives of nerve branches which supply the lacrimal gland and the mucous secreting glands of the nasal and oral cavities.
0021615	name:Name:glossopharyngeal nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN IX morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the glossopharyngeal nerve is generated and organized. Various sensory and motor branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve supply nerve connections to the pharynx and back of the tongue. The branchial motor component contains motor fibers that innervate muscles that elevate the pharynx and larynx, and the tympanic branch supplies parasympathetic fibers to the otic ganglion.
0021618	name:Name:hypoglossal nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN XII morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the hypoglossal nerve is generated and organized. This motor nerve innervates all the intrinsic and all but one of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
0021622	name:Name:oculomotor nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN III morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the oculomotor nerve is generated and organized. This motor nerve innervates all extraocular muscles except the superior oblique and the lateral rectus muscles. The superior division supplies the levator palpebrae superioris and superior rectus muscles. The inferior division supplies the medial rectus, inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles. This nerve also innervates the striated muscles of the eyelid. Pupillary constriction and lens movement are mediated by this nerve for near vision. In the orbit the inferior division sends branches that enter the ciliary ganglion where they form functional contacts (synapses) with the ganglion cells. The ganglion cells send nerve fibers into the back of the eye where they travel to ultimately innervate the ciliary muscle and the constrictor pupillae muscle.
0021627	name:Name:olfactory nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN I morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the olfactory nerve is generated and organized. The olfactory nerve is a collection of sensory nerve rootlets that extend down from the olfactory bulb to the olfactory mucosa of the upper parts of the nasal cavity. This nerve conducts odor information to the brainstem.
0021631	name:Name:optic nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN II morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the optic nerve is generated and organized. The sensory optic nerve originates from the bipolar cells of the retina and conducts visual information to the brainstem. The optic nerve exits the back of the eye in the orbit, enters the optic canal, and enters the central nervous system at the optic chiasm (crossing) where the nerve fibers become the optic tract just prior to entering the hindbrain.
0021636	name:Name:trigeminal nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN V morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the trigeminal nerve is generated and organized. The trigeminal nerve is composed of three large branches. They are the ophthalmic (V1, sensory), maxillary (V2, sensory) and mandibular (V3, motor and sensory) branches. The sensory ophthalmic branch travels through the superior orbital fissure and passes through the orbit to reach the skin of the forehead and top of the head. The maxillary nerve contains sensory branches that reach the pterygopalatine fossa via the inferior orbital fissure (face, cheek and upper teeth) and pterygopalatine canal (soft and hard palate, nasal cavity and pharynx). The motor part of the mandibular branch is distributed to the muscles of mastication, the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly of the digastric. The mandibular nerve also innervates the tensor veli palatini and tensor tympani muscles. The sensory part of the mandibular nerve is composed of branches that carry general sensory information from the mucous membranes of the mouth and cheek, anterior two-thirds of the tongue, lower teeth, skin of the lower jaw, side of the head and scalp and meninges of the anterior and middle cranial fossae.
0021639	name:Name:trochlear nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CH IV morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the trochlear nerve is generated and organized. The trochlear nerve is a motor nerve and is the only cranial nerve to exit the brain dorsally. The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle.
0021644	name:Name:vagus nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN X morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the vagus nerve is generated and organized. This nerve is primarily sensory but also has visceromotor components. It originates in the brain stem and controls many autonomic functions of the heart, lungs, stomach, pharynx, larynx, trachea, esophagus and other gastrointestinal tract components. It controls some motor functions such as speech. The sensory branches mediate sensation from the pharynx, larynx, thorax and abdomen; it also innervates taste buds in the epiglottis.
0021648	name:Name:vestibulocochlear nerve morphogenesis	name:Synonym:CN VIII morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the vestibulocochlear nerve is generated and organized. This sensory nerve innervates the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear. The vestibular branch innervates the vestibular apparatus that senses head position changes relative to gravity. The auditory branch innervates the cochlear duct, which is connected to the three bony ossicles which transduce sound waves into fluid movement in the cochlea.
0021683	name:Name:cerebellar granular layer morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cerebellar granular layer is generated and organized. The granular layer is the innermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer contains densely packed small neurons, mostly granule cells. Some Golgi cells are found at the outer border. Granule neurons send parallel fibers to the upper molecular layer, where they synapse with Purkinje cell dendrites. Mossy fibers from the pontine nuclei in the white matter synapse with granule cell axons, Golgi cell axons and unipolar brush interneuron axons at cerebellar glomeruli in the granule cell layer.
0021687	name:Name:cerebellar molecular layer morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cerebellar molecular layer is generated and organized. The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the parallel fibers of the granule cells, interneurons such as stellate and basket cells, and the dendrites of the underlying Purkinje cells.
0021692	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell layer morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer is generated and organized. The Purkinje cell layer lies just underneath the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the neuronal cell bodies of the Purkinje cells that are arranged side by side in a single layer. Candelabrum interneurons are vertically oriented between the Purkinje cells. Purkinje neurons are inhibitory and provide the output of the cerebellar cortex through axons that project into the white matter. Extensive dendritic trees from the Purkinje cells extend upward in a single plane into the molecular layer where they synapse with parallel fibers of granule cells.
0021696	name:Name:cerebellar cortex morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the cranial nerves are generated and organized. The cerebellar cortex is a thin mantle of gray matter that covers the surface of each cerebral hemisphere. It has a characteristic morphology with convolutions (gyri) and crevices (sulci) that have specific functions. Six layers of nerve cells and the nerve pathways that connect them comprise the cerebellar cortex. Together, these regions are responsible for the processes of conscious thought, perception, emotion and memory as well as advanced motor function.
0021704	name:Name:locus ceruleus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the locus ceruleus is generated and organized. In mice, the locus ceruleus is a dense cluster of neurons within the dorsorostral pons. This nucleus is the major location of neurons that release norepinephrine throughout the brain, and is responsible for physiological responses to stress and panic.
0021714	name:Name:inferior olivary nucleus morphogenesis	name:Synonym:inferior olive morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the inferior olivary nucleus is generated and organized. The inferior olivary nucleus is a capsule-shaped structure in the ventral medulla located just lateral and dorsal to the medullary pyramids. Neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus are the source of climbing fiber input to the cerebellar cortex; these neurons have been implicated in various functions, such as learning and timing of movements.
0021719	name:Name:superior olivary nucleus morphogenesis	name:Synonym:superior olive morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the superior olivary nucleus is generated and organized. In mice, the superior olivary nucleus is a small cylindrical mass on the dorsal surface of the lateral part of the trapezoid body of the pons, and it is situated immediately above the inferior olivary nucleus. It receives projections from the cochlear nucleus and thus is involved in the perception of sound.
0022612	name:Name:gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a gland are generated and organized.
0007435	name:Name:salivary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the salivary gland are generated and organized.
0060443	name:Name:mammary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures of the mammary gland are generated and organized. Morphogenesis refers to the creation of shape. The mammary gland is a large compound sebaceous gland that in female mammals is modified to secrete milk.
0031069	name:Name:hair follicle morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hair follicle are generated and organized.
0031099	name:Name:regeneration	info:Definition:The regrowth of a lost or destroyed body part, such as an organ or tissue.
0042246	name:Name:tissue regeneration	info:Definition:The regrowth of lost or destroyed tissues.
0035107	name:Name:appendage morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of appendages are generated and organized. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism, such as a limb or a branch.
0033334	name:Name:fin morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a fin are generated and organized.
0035108	name:Name:limb morphogenesis	name:Synonym:limb bud morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a limb are generated and organized. A limb is an appendage of an animal used for locomotion or grasping. Examples include legs, arms or some types of fin.
0035113	name:Name:embryonic appendage morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the embryo, by which the anatomical structures of the appendage are generated and organized. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism, such as a limb or a branch.
0035114	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived appendage morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of appendages are generated and organized. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism.
0035111	name:Name:leg joint morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a leg joint are generated and organized. The leg joint is a flexible region that separates the rigid sections of a leg to allow movement in a controlled manner. One example is the knee, which separates the leg tibia and femur.
0046591	name:Name:embryonic leg joint morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the embryo, by which the anatomical structures of the leg joint are generated and organized. A leg joint is a flexible region that separates the rigid sections of a leg to allow movement in a controlled manner.
0035121	name:Name:tail morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the tail are generated and organized. The tail is the hindmost part of some animals.
0045138	name:Name:tail tip morphogenesis	name:Synonym:male tail morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the tail tip are generated and organized. The tail tip undergoes morphogenesis to form a copulatory structure. The most posterior hypodermal cells in the tail define a specialized, sexually dimorphic compartment in which cells fuse and retract in the male, changing their shape from a tapered cone to a blunt dome. An example of this process is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0035239	name:Name:tube morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a tube are generated and organized. Epithelial and endothelial tubes transport gases, liquids and cells from one site to another and form the basic structure of many organs and tissues, with tube shape and organization varying from the single-celled excretory organ in Caenorhabditis elegans to the branching trees of the mammalian kidney and insect tracheal system.
0001947	name:Name:heart looping	name:Synonym:cardiac looping	info:Definition:The characteristic morphogenetic movements where the primitive heart tube loops asymmetrically. This looping brings the primitive heart chambers into alignment preceding their future integration.
0003146	name:Name:heart jogging	name:Synonym:cardiac jogging	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the heart cone is displaced to the left with respect to the vector of the anterior-posterior axis.
0003297	name:Name:heart wedging	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the aorta inserts between the atrioventricular valves, contributing to the shaping of the heart.
0007426	name:Name:tracheal outgrowth, open tracheal system	info:Definition:The projection of branches of an open tracheal system towards their target tissues. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035146	name:Name:tube fusion	info:Definition:The joining of specific branches of a tubular system to form a continuous network.
0048752	name:Name:semicircular canal morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic semicircular canal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the semicircular canals are generated and organized.
0060197	name:Name:cloacal septation	info:Definition:The separation of the single opening of the digestive, urinary, and reproductive tracts, the cloaca, into multiple isolated openings during development.
0060562	name:Name:epithelial tube morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a tube are generated and organized from an epithelium. Epithelial tubes transport gases, liquids and cells from one site to another and form the basic structure of many organs and tissues, with tube shape and organization varying from the single-celled excretory organ in Caenorhabditis elegans to the branching trees of the mammalian kidney and insect tracheal system.
0035277	name:Name:spiracle morphogenesis, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:spiracle morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a spiracle are generated and organized. Spiracles are the openings in the insect open tracheal system; externally they connect to the epidermis and internally they connect to the tracheal trunk.
0035762	name:Name:dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve is generated and organized. Morphogenesis pertains to the creation of form.
0035910	name:Name:ascending aorta morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the ascending aorta are generated and organized. The ascending aorta is the portion of the aorta in a two-pass circulatory system that lies between the heart and the arch of aorta. In a two-pass circulatory system blood passes twice through the heart to supply the body once.
0035911	name:Name:descending aorta morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the descending aorta are generated and organized. The descending aorta is the portion of the aorta in a two-pass circulatory system from the arch of aorta to the point where it divides into the common iliac arteries. In a two-pass circulatory system blood passes twice through the heart to supply the body once.
0035922	name:Name:foramen ovale closure	name:Synonym:foramen ovale of heart closure	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the foramen ovale closes after birth, to prevent blood flow between the right and left atria. In the fetal heart, the foramen ovale allows blood to enter the left atrium from the right atrium. Closure of the foramen ovale after birth stops this blood flow.
0048514	name:Name:blood vessel morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of blood vessels are generated and organized. The blood vessel is the vasculature carrying blood.
0048844	name:Name:artery morphogenesis	name:Synonym:arterial morphogenesis	name:Synonym:arteriogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of arterial blood vessels are generated and organized. Arteries are blood vessels that transport blood from the heart to the body and its organs.
0048845	name:Name:venous blood vessel morphogenesis	name:Synonym:vein morphogenesis	name:Synonym:venous morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of venous blood vessels are generated and organized. Veins are blood vessels that transport blood from the body and its organs to the heart.
0060977	name:Name:coronary vasculature morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cardiac blood vessel morphogenesis	name:Synonym:cardiac vasculature morphogenesis	name:Synonym:coronary blood vessel morphogenesis	name:Synonym:heart blood vessel morphogenesis	name:Synonym:heart vasculature morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of blood vessels of the heart are generated and organized. The blood vessel is the vasculature carrying blood.
0061304	name:Name:retinal blood vessel morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a blood vessel of the retina over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072103	name:Name:glomerulus vasculature morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the glomerulus vasculature are generated and organized. The glomerulus vasculature is composed of the tubule structures that carry blood or lymph in the glomerulus.
0048546	name:Name:digestive tract morphogenesis	name:Synonym:alimentary canal morphogenesis	name:Synonym:digestive tube morphogenesis	name:Synonym:gastrointestinal tract morphogenesis	name:Synonym:gut morphogenesis	name:Synonym:intestinal morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the digestive tract are generated and organized. The digestive tract is the anatomical structure through which food passes and is processed.
0061031	name:Name:endodermal digestive tract morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the endodermal digestive tract are generated and organized. The endodermal digestive tract includes those portions of the digestive tract that are derived from endoderm.
0048598	name:Name:embryonic morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which anatomical structures are generated and organized during the embryonic phase. The embryonic phase begins with zygote formation. The end of the embryonic phase is organism-specific. For example, it would be at birth for mammals, larval hatching for insects and seed dormancy in plants.
0001828	name:Name:inner cell mass cellular morphogenesis	info:Definition:The morphogenesis of cells in the inner cell mass.
0001831	name:Name:trophectodermal cellular morphogenesis	name:Synonym:trophectoderm cellular morphogenesis	info:Definition:The morphogenesis of trophectoderm cells.
0002093	name:Name:auditory receptor cell morphogenesis	name:Synonym:hair cell morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that alters the size or shape of an auditory receptor cell.
0003143	name:Name:embryonic heart tube morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the embryonic heart tube are generated and organized. The embryonic heart tube is an epithelial tube that will give rise to the mature heart.
0003152	name:Name:morphogenesis of an epithelial fold involved in embryonic heart tube formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which an epithelial sheet bends along a linear axis, contributing to embryonic heart tube formation.
0003314	name:Name:heart rudiment morphogenesis	name:Synonym:heart cone morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the heart rudiment are generated and organized.
0003344	name:Name:pericardium morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the pericardium is generated and organized.
0003404	name:Name:optic vesicle morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the formation and shaping of the optic vesicle. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the vesicle and ends when the vesicle has evaginated. The optic vesicle is the evagination of neurectoderm that precedes formation of the optic cup.
0007369	name:Name:gastrulation	info:Definition:A complex and coordinated series of cellular movements that occurs at the end of cleavage during embryonic development of most animals. The details of gastrulation vary from species to species, but usually result in the formation of the three primary germ layers, ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.
0007374	name:Name:posterior midgut invagination	info:Definition:Formation of a cup-shaped invagination at the posterior end of the embryo, bringing the posterior midgut and hindgut primordia into the interior.
0007377	name:Name:germ-band extension	info:Definition:Elongation of the germ band on the ventral side of the embryo, accompanied by a halving in width. The elongation process pushes the posterior midgut invagination closed and compresses the amnioserosa further.
0007390	name:Name:germ-band shortening	name:Synonym:germ-band retraction	info:Definition:The spreading of the amnioserosa from its compressed state to cover the whole of the dorsal surface. Initiating in the thorax and spreading posteriorly, it is accompanied by the transition from a parasegmental to segmental division of the embryo.
0007392	name:Name:initiation of dorsal closure	info:Definition:Events that occur at the start of dorsal closure.
0007396	name:Name:suture of dorsal opening	info:Definition:Closure of the dorsal hole. Filopodia extending from each leading edge interdigitate at the dorsal midline and appear to prime the formation of adherens junctions between the two rows of leading edge cells. Newly formed septate junctions are also used to seal the dorsal hole.
0007443	name:Name:Malpighian tubule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the Malpighian tubule are generated and organized. This process takes place entirely during the embryonic phase. A Malpighian tubule is a fine, thin-walled excretory tubule in insects which leads into the posterior part of the gut.
0008258	name:Name:head involution	info:Definition:Movement of the anterior ectoderm to the interior of the embryo.
0014022	name:Name:neural plate elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the neural plate is shaped by the intrinsic movement of the epidermal and neural plate regions.
0016331	name:Name:morphogenesis of embryonic epithelium	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of embryonic epithelia are generated and organized.
0021503	name:Name:neural fold bending	info:Definition:The morphogenesis of the neural fold elevations that results in the movement of the tips of the elevations towards each other in order to fuse.
0021505	name:Name:neural fold folding	info:Definition:The process of folding the neuroepithelium around the medial hinge point to create the neural elevations, and around the lateral hinge points to produce convergence of the folds.
0021555	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary morphogenesis	name:Synonym:isthmus morphogenesis	name:Synonym:MHB morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary is generated and organized. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0021991	name:Name:neural plate thickening	info:Definition:The process of apical-basal elongation of individual ectodermal cells during the formation of the neural placode.
0021993	name:Name:initiation of neural tube closure	info:Definition:The process in which closure points are established at multiple points and along the neural rostrocaudal axis.
0021996	name:Name:lamina terminalis formation	info:Definition:The process in which the anterior-most portion of the neural axis is formed by closure of the anterior neuropore.
0022007	name:Name:convergent extension involved in neural plate elongation	info:Definition:The process of directed cell movement in the neural plate resulting in tissue elongation via intercalation of adjacent cells in an epithelial sheet at the midline, leading to narrowing and lengthening of the neural plate.
0032474	name:Name:otolith morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of an otolith are generated and organized.
0033505	name:Name:floor plate morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the floor plate is generated and organized.
0035880	name:Name:embryonic nail plate morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the embryo, by which the anatomical structures of a nail plate are generated and organized. The nail plate is the hard and translucent portion of the nail, composed of keratin, and serves to protect the tips of digits.
0042472	name:Name:inner ear morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the inner ear are generated and organized. The inner ear is the structure in vertebrates that contains the organs of balance and hearing. It consists of soft hollow sensory structures (the membranous labyrinth) containing fluid (endolymph) surrounded by fluid (perilymph) and encased in a bony cavity (the bony labyrinth). It consists of two chambers, the sacculus and utriculus, from which arise the cochlea and semicircular canals respectively.
0042473	name:Name:outer ear morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the outer ear are generated and organized. The outer ear is the part of the ear external to the tympanum (eardrum). It consists of a tube (the external auditory meatus) that directs sound waves on to the tympanum, and may also include the external pinna, which extends beyond the skull.
0042474	name:Name:middle ear morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the middle ear are generated and organized. The middle ear is the air-filled cavity within the skull of vertebrates that lies between the outer ear and the inner ear. It is linked to the pharynx (and therefore to outside air) via the Eustachian tube and in mammals contains the three ear ossicles, which transmit auditory vibrations from the outer ear (via the tympanum) to the inner ear (via the oval window).
0042733	name:Name:embryonic digit morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring in the embryo, by which the anatomical structures of the digit are generated and organized. A digit is one of the terminal divisions of an appendage, such as a finger or toe.
0046664	name:Name:dorsal closure, amnioserosa morphology change	info:Definition:The changes that occur during dorsal closure of the shape and structure of the amnioserosa, an epithelium that occupies the dorsal side of the embryo.
0048314	name:Name:embryo sac morphogenesis	name:Synonym:female gametophyte morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the embryo sac are generated and organized. The embryo sac develops from the megaspore in heterosporous plants.
0048613	name:Name:embryonic ectodermal digestive tract morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic ectodermal gut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process, occurring during the embryonic phase, by which the anatomical structures of the ectodermal digestive tract are generated and organized.
0048617	name:Name:embryonic foregut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the foregut are generated and organized, during the embryonic phase.
0048619	name:Name:embryonic hindgut morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hindgut are generated and organized, during the embryonic phase.
0048702	name:Name:embryonic neurocranium morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic braincase morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic chondrocranium morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the neurocranium are generated and organized during the embryonic phase. The neurocranium is the portion of the vertebrate skull surrounding the brain.
0048703	name:Name:embryonic viscerocranium morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonic pharyngeal skeleton morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the viscerocranium are generated and organized during the embryonic phase. The viscerocranium is the part of the skull comprising the facial bones.
0055109	name:Name:invagination involved in gastrulation with mouth forming second	info:Definition:The infolding of the epithelial sheet into the embryo involved in deuterostomic gastrulation.
0055110	name:Name:involution involved in gastrulation with mouth forming second	info:Definition:The inturning of an epithelial sheet over the basal surface of an outer layer involved in deuterostomic gastrulation.
0055113	name:Name:epiboly involved in gastrulation with mouth forming second	info:Definition:The expansion of one cell sheet over other cells involved in deuterostomic gastrulation.
0060027	name:Name:convergent extension involved in gastrulation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which an epithelium narrows along one axis and lengthens in a perpendicular axis usually resulting in the formation of the three primary germ layers, ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.
0060059	name:Name:embryonic retina morphogenesis in camera-type eye	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the retina is generated and organized in a camera-type eye during the embryonic life stage.
0060116	name:Name:vestibular receptor cell morphogenesis	name:Synonym:vestibular hair cell morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that alters the size or shape of a vestibular receptor cell.
0060669	name:Name:embryonic placenta morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the embryonic placenta is generated and organized.
0060672	name:Name:epithelial cell morphogenesis involved in placental branching	info:Definition:The change in form (cell shape and size) that occurs when a trophoblast cell elongates to contribute to the branching of the placenta.
0060713	name:Name:labyrinthine layer morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the labyrinthine layer of the placenta is generated and organized.
0060809	name:Name:mesodermal to mesenchymal transition involved in gastrulation	info:Definition:The epithelial to mesenchymal transition process in which a mesodermal cell loses apical/basolateral polarity, severs intercellular adhesive junctions, degrades basement membrane components and becomes a migratory mesenchymal cell as part of the process of gastrulation.
0060878	name:Name:pouch outgrowth involved in semicircular canal formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which an epithelial sheet bends along a linear axis and gives rise to a pouch that will form a semicircular canal.
0060880	name:Name:cell morphogenesis involved in semicircular canal fusion	info:Definition:The change in form (cell shape and size) that occurs when a semicircular canal epithelial cell acquires the structural features that allow it to contribute to the process of semicircular canal fusion.
0060884	name:Name:clearance of cells from fusion plate	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which cells are removed from the inner loop of a semicircular canal.
0071699	name:Name:olfactory placode morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the olfactory placode are generated and organized. The olfactory placode is a thickening of the neural ectoderm in the head region of the vertebrate embryo which develops into the olfactory region of the nasal cavity.
0090103	name:Name:cochlea morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the cochlea is generated and organized.
0090177	name:Name:establishment of planar polarity involved in neural tube closure	info:Definition:Coordinated organization of groups of cells in the plane of an epithelium that contributes to the closure of the neural tube.
0090246	name:Name:convergent extension involved in somitogenesis	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which a presomitic mesoderm narrows along the left-right axis and lengthens in the rostral-caudal axis contributing to somitogenesis.
0048729	name:Name:tissue morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a tissue are generated and organized.
0002009	name:Name:morphogenesis of an epithelium	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of epithelia are generated and organized. An epithelium consists of closely packed cells arranged in one or more layers, that covers the outer surfaces of the body or lines any internal cavity or tube.
0007439	name:Name:ectodermal digestive tract development	name:Synonym:ectodermal gut development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ectodermal digestive tract over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ectodermal digestive tract includes those portions that are derived from ectoderm.
0048332	name:Name:mesoderm morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the mesoderm are generated and organized.
0048730	name:Name:epidermis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:hypodermis morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the epidermis are generated and organized. The epidermis is the outer epithelial layer of a plant or animal, it may be a single layer that produces an extracellular material (e.g. the cuticle of arthropods) or a complex stratified squamous epithelium, as in the case of many vertebrate species.
0060415	name:Name:muscle tissue morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of muscle tissue are generated and organized. Muscle tissue consists of a set of cells that are part of an organ and carry out a contractive function.
0060536	name:Name:cartilage morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of cartilage are generated and organized.
0072132	name:Name:mesenchyme morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a mesenchymal tissue are generated and organized. A mesenchymal tissue is made up of loosely packed stellate cells.
0048750	name:Name:compound eye corneal lens morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the compound eye corneal lens are generated and organized.
0048798	name:Name:swim bladder inflation	name:Synonym:gas bladder inflation	info:Definition:The expansion of the swim bladder by trapped gases. The swim bladder is used by some fishes to maintain buoyancy and may function in addition as a sound producing organ, a sound receptor, and a respiratory organ.
0048848	name:Name:neurohypophysis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:neurophysis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary gland morphogenesis	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the neurohypophysis are generated and organized. The neurohypophysis is the part of the pituitary gland that secretes hormones involved in blood pressure regulation.
0048850	name:Name:hypophysis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:pituitary gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hypophysis are generated and organized. The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland that secretes hormones that regulate many other glands.
0048852	name:Name:diencephalon morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the diencephalon are generated and organized. The diencephalon is the paired caudal parts of the prosencephalon from which the thalamus, hypothalamus, epithalamus and subthalamus are derived; these regions regulate autonomic, visceral and endocrine function, and process information directed to the cerebral cortex.
0048853	name:Name:forebrain morphogenesis	name:Synonym:prosencephalon morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the forebrain are generated and organized. The forebrain is the anterior of the three primary divisions of the developing chordate brain or the corresponding part of the adult brain (in vertebrates, includes especially the cerebral hemispheres, the thalamus, and the hypothalamus and especially in higher vertebrates is the main control center for sensory and associative information processing, visceral functions, and voluntary motor functions).
0048855	name:Name:adenohypophysis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:adenophysis morphogenesis	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary gland morphogenesis	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the adenohypophysis are generated and organized. The adenohypophysis is the anterior part of the pituitary. It secretes a variety of hormones and its function is regulated by the hypothalamus.
0060042	name:Name:retina morphogenesis in camera-type eye	name:Synonym:retina morphogenesis in camera-style eye	name:Synonym:retinogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of the retina is generated and organized.
0060323	name:Name:head morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the head are generated and organized. The head is the anterior-most division of the body.
0060325	name:Name:face morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the face are generated and organized. The face is the ventral division of the head.
0060349	name:Name:bone morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which bones are generated and organized.
0060350	name:Name:endochondral bone morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which bones are generated and organized as a result of the conversion of initial cartilaginous anlage into bone.
0060411	name:Name:cardiac septum morphogenesis	name:Synonym:heart septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structure of a cardiac septum is generated and organized. A cardiac septum is a partition that separates parts of the heart.
0003148	name:Name:outflow tract septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the outflow tract septum are generated and organized. The outflow tract septum is a partition in the outflow tract.
0060412	name:Name:ventricular septum morphogenesis	name:Synonym:interventricular septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process in which a ventricular septum is generated and organized. A ventricular septum is an anatomical structure that separates the lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart from one another.
0060413	name:Name:atrial septum morphogenesis	name:Synonym:atrial septum morphogenesis	name:Synonym:interatrial septum morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process in which atrial septum is generated and organized. The atrial septum separates the upper chambers (the atria) of the heart from one another.
0060436	name:Name:bronchiole morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a bronchiole is generated and organized. A bronchiole is the first airway branch that no longer contains cartilage; it is a branch of the bronchi.
0060463	name:Name:lung lobe morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of a lung lobe are generated and organized. A lung lobe is a projection that extends from the lung.
0060658	name:Name:nipple morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the nipple is generated and organized.
0060794	name:Name:leaflet morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the leaflet are generated and organized.
0060778	name:Name:primary leaflet morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the primary leaflet attains its shape. A primary leaflet is a leaflet that develops directly from the rachis.
0060779	name:Name:secondary leaflet morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the secondary leaflet attains its shape. A secondary leaflet develops by branching or division of a primary leaflet.
0060780	name:Name:intercalary leaflet morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the intercalary leaflet attains its shape. An intercalary leaflet is a leaflet that develops between primary leaflets.
0061072	name:Name:iris morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the iris is generated and organized. The iris is an anatomical structure in the eye whose opening forms the pupil. The iris is responsible for controlling the diameter and size of the pupil and the amount of light reaching the retina.
0061073	name:Name:ciliary body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the ciliary body generated and organized. The ciliary body is the circumferential tissue inside the eye composed of the ciliary muscle and ciliary processes.
0061146	name:Name:Peyer's patch morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which a Peyer's patch is generated and organized. Peyer's patches are typically found as nodules associated with gut epithelium with distinct internal structures including B- and T-zones for the activation of lymphocytes.
0061194	name:Name:taste bud morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the taste bud are generated and organized. The taste bud is a specialized area of the tongue that contains taste receptors.
0061197	name:Name:fungiform papilla morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the fungiform papilla are generated and organized. The fungiform papilla is a mushroom-shaped papilla of the tongue.
0061299	name:Name:retina vasculature morphogenesis in camera-type eye	name:Synonym:retinal vasculature morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the vasculature of the retina is generated and organized.
0061301	name:Name:cerebellum vasculature morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the vasculature of the cerebellum is generated and organized.
0061383	name:Name:trabecula morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process of shaping a trabecula in an organ. A trabecula is a small, often microscopic, tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod, which generally has a mechanical function. Trabecula are usually but not necessarily, composed of dense collagenous tissue.
0061384	name:Name:heart trabecular morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process of shaping a trabecula in the heart. A trabecula is a small, often microscopic, tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod, which generally has a mechanical function. Trabecula are usually but not necessarily, composed of dense collagenous tissue.
0071697	name:Name:ectodermal placode morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of an ectodermal placode are generated and organized. An ectodermal placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that is the primordium of many structures derived from the ectoderm.
0071729	name:Name:beak morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the beak are generated and organized. The avian beak is an external anatomical structure, in the head region, that is adapted for feeding self and young, catching prey, probing, etc. It encompasses, but is not restricted to, the maxilla, mandible, maxillary ramaphotheca, mandibular ramaphotheca, nostril, nasal fossa, nasal bones, egg tooth and rictus.
0072028	name:Name:nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the nephron are generated and organized. A nephron is the functional unit of the kidney.
0039007	name:Name:pronephric nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the pronephric nephron are generated and organized. A pronephric nephron is the functional unit of the pronephros.
0061228	name:Name:mesonephric nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the mesonephric nephron are generated and organized. A mesonephric nephron is the functional unit of the mesonephros.
0072273	name:Name:metanephric nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the metanephric nephron are generated and organized. A metanephric nephron is the functional unit of the metanephros.
0072049	name:Name:comma-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the comma-shaped body is generated and organized. The comma-shaped body is the precursor structure to the S-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of the nephron.
0061236	name:Name:mesonephric comma-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the mesonephric comma-shaped body is generated and organized. The mesonephric comma-shaped body is the precursor structure to the mesonephric S-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of a nephron in the mesonephros.
0072278	name:Name:metanephric comma-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the metanephric comma-shaped body is generated and organized. The metanephric comma-shaped body is the precursor structure to the metanephric S-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of a nephron in the metanephros.
0072050	name:Name:S-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the S-shaped body is generated and organized. The S-shaped body is the successor of the comma-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of the nephron.
0061244	name:Name:mesonephric S-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the mesonephric S-shaped body is generated and organized. The mesonephric S-shaped body is the successor of the mesonephric comma-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of a nephron in the mesonephros.
0072284	name:Name:metanephric S-shaped body morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the metanephric S-shaped body is generated and organized. The metanephric S-shaped body is the successor of the metanephric comma-shaped body that contributes to the morphogenesis of a nephron in the metanephros.
0072102	name:Name:glomerulus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the glomerulus are generated and organized. The glomerulus is a capillary tuft surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the vertebrate kidney.
0035775	name:Name:pronephric glomerulus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the pronephric glomerulus are generated and organized. The pronephric glomerulus is part of the pronephric nephron and is restricted to one body segment.
0061234	name:Name:mesonephric glomerulus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the mesonephric glomerulus are generated and organized. The mesonephric glomerulus is a capillary tuft surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the vertebrate mesonephros.
0072275	name:Name:metanephric glomerulus morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the metanephric glomerulus are generated and organized. The metanephric glomerulus is a capillary tuft surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the vertebrate kidney, or metanephros.
0072128	name:Name:renal capsule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the renal capsule are generated and organized. The renal capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the kidney, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage. During development, it comprises a single layer of flattened cells that lie just above the cortical stroma and the condensed mesenchyme of the nephrogenic zone. It is in this region that the early stages of nephron induction and formation of new generations ureteric bud branches occur, as the kidney expands.
0061286	name:Name:mesonephric capsule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the mesonephric capsule are generated and organized. The mesonephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the mesonephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage.
0072265	name:Name:metanephric capsule morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the metanephric capsule are generated and organized. The metanephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the metanephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage.
0072178	name:Name:nephric duct morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the nephric duct are generated and organized. A nephric duct is a tube that drains a primitive kidney.
0039023	name:Name:pronephric duct morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the pronephric duct are generated and organized. The pronephric duct collects the filtrate from the pronephric tubules and opens to the exterior of the kidney.
0072180	name:Name:mesonephric duct morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the mesonephric duct are generated and organized. A mesonephric duct is a tube drains the mesonephros.
0097094	name:Name:craniofacial suture morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which any suture between cranial and/or facial bones is generated and organized.
0060363	name:Name:cranial suture morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which any suture between cranial bones is generated and organized.
0097095	name:Name:frontonasal suture morphogenesis	name:Synonym:nasofrontal suture morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which the frontonasal suture, between frontal and nasal bones, is generated and organized.
0097096	name:Name:facial suture morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which any suture between facial bones is generated and organized.
0009790	name:Name:embryo development	name:Synonym:embryogenesis	name:Synonym:embryogenesis and morphogenesis	name:Synonym:embryonal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an embryo from its formation until the end of its embryonic life stage. The end of the embryonic stage is organism-specific. For example, for mammals, the process would begin with zygote formation and end with birth. For insects, the process would begin at zygote formation and end with larval hatching. For plant zygotic embryos, this would be from zygote formation to the end of seed dormancy. For plant vegetative embryos, this would be from the initial determination of the cell or group of cells to form an embryo until the point when the embryo becomes independent of the parent plant.
0009792	name:Name:embryo development ending in birth or egg hatching	name:Synonym:embryogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an embryo over time, from zygote formation until the end of the embryonic life stage. The end of the embryonic life stage is organism-specific and may be somewhat arbitrary; for mammals it is usually considered to be birth, for insects the hatching of the first instar larva from the eggshell.
0001700	name:Name:embryonic development via the syncytial blastoderm	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryo over time, from zygote formation through syncytial blastoderm to the hatching of the first instar larva. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0043009	name:Name:chordate embryonic development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryo over time, from zygote formation through a stage including a notochord and neural tube until birth or egg hatching.
0009791	name:Name:post-embryonic development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the organism over time, from the completion of embryonic development to the mature structure. See embryonic development.
0002164	name:Name:larval development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the larva over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The larva is the early, immature form of an that at birth or hatching is fundamentally unlike its parent and must metamorphose before assuming the adult characters.
0002117	name:Name:amphibian larval development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the amphibian larva over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Amphibian larvae, sometimes called pollywogs or tadpoles, hatch from eggs and begin to grow limbs and other adult physical features at various times, depending on the species, before they metamorphose into the adult form.
0002119	name:Name:nematode larval development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the nematode larva over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Nematode larval development begins with the newly hatched first-stage larva (L1) and ends with the end of the last larval stage (for example the fourth larval stage (L4) in C. elegans). Each stage of nematode larval development is characterized by proliferation of specific cell lineages and an increase in body size without alteration of the basic body plan. Nematode larval stages are separated by molts in which each stage-specific exoskeleton, or cuticle, is shed and replaced anew.
0002168	name:Name:instar larval development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the larva over time, from its formation to the mature structure. This begins with the newly hatched first-instar larva, through its maturation to the end of the last larval stage. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0002165	name:Name:instar larval or pupal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the instar larva or pupa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035209	name:Name:pupal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pupa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pupa is a dormant life stage interposed between the larval and the adult stages in insects that undergo a complete metamorphosis.
0035210	name:Name:prepupal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the prepupa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The prepupal stage is a life stage interposed between the larval and the pupal stages in insects that undergo a complete metamorphosis. The start of the pre-pupal stage is marked by pupariation, and the end is marked by pupation.
0009640	name:Name:photomorphogenesis	name:Synonym:plant development in response to light	info:Definition:The control of plant growth, development, and differentiation by the duration and nature of light, independent of photosynthesis.
0009647	name:Name:skotomorphogenesis	name:Synonym:etiolation	info:Definition:The control of plant growth, development, and differentiation in response to growth in darkness.
0010049	name:Name:acquisition of reproductive competence	info:Definition:The process in which a plant acquires the ability to respond to a floral inductive signal.
0010050	name:Name:vegetative phase change	info:Definition:Any process involved in the transition of a plant from a juvenile phase of vegetative development to an adult phase of vegetative development.
0010374	name:Name:stomatal complex development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stomatal complex over time from its formation to the mature structure. The stomatal complex is the stomatal guard cells and their associated epidermal cells.
0048528	name:Name:post-embryonic root development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the post-embryonic root over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048527	name:Name:lateral root development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lateral root over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A lateral root is one formed from pericycle cells located on the xylem radius of the root, as opposed to the initiation of the main root from the embryo proper.
0090351	name:Name:seedling development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the seedling over time, beginning with seed germination and ending when the first adult leaves emerge.
0009838	name:Name:abscission	info:Definition:The controlled shedding of a body part.
0060866	name:Name:leaf abscission	info:Definition:The controlled shedding of a leaf.
0060867	name:Name:fruit abscission	info:Definition:The controlled shedding of a fruit.
0009847	name:Name:spore germination	info:Definition:The physiological and developmental changes that occur in a spore following release from dormancy up to the earliest signs of growth (e.g. emergence from a spore wall).
0075005	name:Name:spore germination on or near host	info:Definition:The physiological, developmental and morphological changes that occur in a symbiont spore following release from dormancy up to the earliest signs of growth occurring on or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075226	name:Name:encysted zoospore germination on or near host	info:Definition:The physiological, developmental and morphological changes that occur in the symbiont encysted zoospore, which is on or near its host organism and germinates by developing a germ tube that may penetrate the host directly or indirectly through an appresorium. An encysted zoospore is a zoospore which has shed its flagellum and whose membrane has fused to form a walled cyst. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0010014	name:Name:meristem initiation	info:Definition:Initiation of a region of tissue in a plant that is composed of one or more undifferentiated cells capable of undergoing mitosis and differentiation, thereby effecting growth and development of a plant by giving rise to more meristem or specialized tissue.
0010022	name:Name:meristem determinacy	info:Definition:The process in which a meristem becomes determinate (i.e. ceases to produce lateral organs and may or may not terminally differentiate).
0010073	name:Name:meristem maintenance	info:Definition:Any process involved in maintaining the identity, size and shape of a meristem.
0016203	name:Name:muscle attachment	info:Definition:The developmental process in which a skeletal muscle attaches to its target (such as bone or body wall).
0019827	name:Name:stem cell maintenance	name:Synonym:maintenance of pluripotency	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of stem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010074	name:Name:maintenance of meristem identity	name:Synonym:maintenance of meristem cell identity	name:Synonym:meristem cell maintenance	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010076	name:Name:maintenance of floral meristem identity	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of floral meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010077	name:Name:maintenance of inflorescence meristem identity	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of inflorescence meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010078	name:Name:maintenance of root meristem identity	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of root meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010079	name:Name:maintenance of vegetative meristem identity	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of vegetative meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0010492	name:Name:maintenance of shoot apical meristem identity	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of shoot apical meristem cells, preventing the commitment of all stem cell progeny to a differentiated cell fate.
0030718	name:Name:germ-line stem cell maintenance	info:Definition:Any process involved in preventing uncommitted germ-line stem cells from differentiating as another cell type.
0035019	name:Name:somatic stem cell maintenance	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of somatic stem cells, undifferentiated cells in the embryo or adult which can undergo unlimited division and give rise to cell types of the body other than those of the germ-line.
0014834	name:Name:satellite cell maintenance involved in skeletal muscle regeneration	name:Synonym:satellite cell compartment self-renewal involved in skeletal muscle regeneration	name:Synonym:satellite cell population maintenance	name:Synonym:satellite cell self-renewal	info:Definition:The process essential to maintain a ready source of satellite cells. It consists of the return of activated satellite cells to a quiescent state after proliferation to replenish the satellite cell pool. Satellite cells are quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the muscle fiber, which are the main contributors to postnatal muscle growth. In adult muscle, satellite cells become activated to divide and differentiate in response to muscle damage.
0072038	name:Name:mesenchymal stem cell maintenance involved in nephron morphogenesis	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of mesenchymal stem cells that contributes to the shaping of a nephron. A mesenchymal stem cell is a cell that retains the ability to divide and proliferate throughout life to provide progenitor cells that can differentiate into specialized mesenchymal cells.
0097150	name:Name:neuronal stem cell maintenance	info:Definition:The process in which an organism retains a population of neuronal stem cells, undifferentiated cells that originate from the neuroectoderm and have the capacity both to perpetually self-renew without differentiating and to generate multiple types of lineage-restricted progenitors.
0021700	name:Name:developmental maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an anatomical structure, cell or cellular component to attain its fully functional state.
0007593	name:Name:chitin-based cuticle tanning	name:Synonym:cuticle hardening	info:Definition:The cross-linking of chitin and other cuticle proteins, rendering them insoluble and hardening the cuticle. This process generally darkens the color of the cuticle.
0010152	name:Name:pollen maturation	info:Definition:The final stages of microgametogenesis after the trinucleate stage has been reached resulting in viable pollen grains.
0016188	name:Name:synaptic vesicle maturation	info:Definition:Steps required to form an initiated synaptic vesicle into a fully formed and transmissible synaptic vesicle.
0060074	name:Name:synapse maturation	name:Synonym:synaptic maturation	info:Definition:The process that organizes a synapse so that it attains its fully functional state. Synaptic maturation plays a critical role in the establishment of effective synaptic connections in early development.
0071695	name:Name:anatomical structure maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an anatomical structure to attain its fully functional state.
0001955	name:Name:blood vessel maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a blood vessel to attain its fully functional state.
0021578	name:Name:hindbrain maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the hindbrain to attain its fully functional state. The hindbrain is the region consisting of the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Areas of the hindbrain control motor and autonomic functions.
0021582	name:Name:medulla oblongata maturation	name:Synonym:medulla maturation	name:Synonym:myelencephalon maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the medulla oblongata to attain its fully functional state. The medulla oblongata lies directly above the spinal cord and controls vital autonomic functions such as digestion, breathing and the control of heart rate.
0021586	name:Name:pons maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the pons to attain its fully functional state. The pons lies above the medulla and next to the cerebellum. The pons conveys information about movement from the cerebral hemisphere to the cerebellum.
0021590	name:Name:cerebellum maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the cerebellum to attain its fully functional state. The cerebellum is the portion of the brain in the back of the head between the cerebrum and the pons. The cerebellum controls balance for walking and standing, modulates the force and range of movement and is involved in the learning of motor skills.
0021626	name:Name:central nervous system maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the central nervous system to attain its fully functional state. The central nervous system is the core nervous system that serves an integrating and coordinating function. In vertebrates it consists of the brain, spinal cord and spinal nerves. In those invertebrates with a central nervous system it typically consists of a brain, cerebral ganglia and a nerve cord.
0021682	name:Name:nerve maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a nerve to attain its fully functional state.
0021686	name:Name:cerebellar granular layer maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the cerebellar granular layer to attain its fully functional state. The granular layer is the innermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer contains densely packed small neurons, mostly granule cells. Some Golgi cells are found at the outer border. Granule neurons send parallel fibers to the upper molecular layer, where they synapse with Purkinje cell dendrites. Mossy fibers from the pontine nuclei in the white matter synapse with granule cell axons, Golgi cell axons and unipolar brush interneuron axons at cerebellar glomeruli in the granule cell layer.
0021690	name:Name:cerebellar molecular layer maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the cerebellar molecular layer to attain its fully functional state. The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the parallel fibers of the granule cells, interneurons such as stellate and basket cells, and the dendrites of the underlying Purkinje cells.
0021691	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell layer maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer to attain its fully functional state. The Purkinje cell layer lies just underneath the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the neuronal cell bodies of the Purkinje cells that are arranged side by side in a single layer. Candelabrum interneurons are vertically oriented between the Purkinje cells. Purkinje neurons are inhibitory and provide the output of the cerebellar cortex through axons that project into the white matter. Extensive dendritic trees from the Purkinje cells extend upward in a single plane into the molecular layer where they synapse with parallel fibers of granule cells.
0021699	name:Name:cerebellar cortex maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the cerebellar cortex to attain its fully functional state. The cerebellar cortex is a thin mantle of gray matter that covers the surface of each cerebral hemisphere. It has a characteristic morphology with convolutions (gyri) and crevices (sulci) that have specific functions. Six layers of nerve cells and the nerve pathways that connect them comprise the cerebellar cortex. Together, these regions are responsible for the processes of conscious thought, perception, emotion and memory as well as advanced motor function.
0021706	name:Name:locus ceruleus maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the locus ceruleus to attain its fully functional state. The locus ceruleus is a dense cluster of neurons within the dorsorostral pons. This nucleus is the major location of neurons that release norepinephrine throughout the brain, and is responsible for physiological responses to stress and panic.
0021717	name:Name:inferior olivary nucleus maturation	name:Synonym:inferior olive maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the inferior olivary nucleus to attain its fully functional state. The inferior olivary nucleus is a capsule-shaped structure in the ventral medulla located just lateral and dorsal to the medullary pyramids. Neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus are the source of climbing fiber input to the cerebellar cortex; these neurons have been implicated in various functions, such as learning and timing of movements.
0021722	name:Name:superior olivary nucleus maturation	name:Synonym:superior olive maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the superior olivary nucleus to attain its fully functional state. The superior olivary nucleus is a small cylindrical mass on the dorsal surface of the lateral part of the trapezoid body of the pons, and it is situated immediately above the inferior olivary nucleus. It receives projections from the cochlear nucleus and thus is involved in the perception of sound.
0021732	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary maturation	name:Synonym:isthmus maturation	name:Synonym:MHB maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the midbrain-hindbrain boundary to attain its fully functional state. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0035761	name:Name:dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve to attain its fully functional state.
0048799	name:Name:organ maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for an organ to attain its fully functional state. An organ is a tissue or set of tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0048820	name:Name:hair follicle maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for a hair follicle to attain its fully functional state.
0070977	name:Name:bone maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for bone to attain its fully functional state.
0071700	name:Name:olfactory placode maturation	info:Definition:A developmental process, independent of morphogenetic (shape) change, that is required for the olfactory placode to attain its fully functional state. The olfactory placode is a thickening of the neural ectoderm in the head region of the vertebrate embryo which develops into the olfactory region of the nasal cavity.
0022004	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary maturation during brain development	info:Definition:A developmental process occurring after the brain has been specified along the neural axis that is required for the midbrain-hindbrain boundary to attain its fully functional state. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0022005	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary maturation during neural plate development	name:Synonym:midbrain-hindbrain boundary maturation involved in neural plate development	info:Definition:A developmental process occurring before the brain has been specified along the neural axis that is required for the midbrain-hindbrain boundary to attain its fully functional state. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0022611	name:Name:dormancy process	info:Definition:The process in which a dormant state is induced, maintained or broken. Dormancy is characterized by a suspension of physiological activity.
0055115	name:Name:entry into diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results in entry into diapause. Diapause is a neurohormonally mediated, dynamic state of low metabolic activity. Associated characteristics of this form of dormancy include reduced morphogenesis, increased resistance to environmental extremes, and altered or reduced behavioral activity. Full expression develops in a species-specific manner, usually in response to a number of environmental stimuli that precede unfavorable conditions. Once diapause has begun, metabolic activity is suppressed even if conditions favorable for development prevail. Once initiated, only certain stimuli are capable of releasing the organism from this state, and this characteristic is essential in distinguishing diapause from hibernation.
0043053	name:Name:dauer entry	name:Synonym:nematode entry into dormancy	info:Definition:Entry into the facultative diapause of the dauer (enduring) larval stage of nematode development.
0055116	name:Name:entry into reproductive diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results in entry into reproductive diapause. Reproductive diapause is a form of diapause where the organism itself will remain fully active, including feeding and other routine activities, but the reproductive organs experience a tissue-specific reduction in metabolism, with characteristic triggering and releasing stimuli.
0071981	name:Name:exit from diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results in exit from diapause. Diapause is a neurohormonally mediated, dynamic state of low metabolic activity. Associated characteristics of this form of dormancy include reduced morphogenesis, increased resistance to environmental extremes, and altered or reduced behavioral activity. Full expression develops in a species-specific manner, usually in response to a number of environmental stimuli that precede unfavorable conditions. Once diapause has begun, metabolic activity is suppressed even if conditions favorable for development prevail. Once initiated, only certain stimuli are capable of releasing the organism from this state, and this characteristic is essential in distinguishing diapause from hibernation.
0043054	name:Name:dauer exit	name:Synonym:exit from nematode dormancy	info:Definition:Exit from the facultative diapause of the dauer (enduring) larval stage of nematode development.
0071983	name:Name:exit from reproductive diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results in exit from reproductive diapause. Reproductive diapause is a form of diapause where the organism itself will remain fully active, including feeding and other routine activities, but the reproductive organs experience a tissue-specific reduction in metabolism, with characteristic triggering and releasing stimuli.
0071982	name:Name:maintenance of diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results an organism remaining in diapause. Diapause is a neurohormonally mediated, dynamic state of low metabolic activity. Associated characteristics of this form of dormancy include reduced morphogenesis, increased resistance to environmental extremes, and altered or reduced behavioral activity. Full expression develops in a species-specific manner, usually in response to a number of environmental stimuli that precede unfavorable conditions. Once diapause has begun, metabolic activity is suppressed even if conditions favorable for development prevail. Once initiated, only certain stimuli are capable of releasing the organism from this state, and this characteristic is essential in distinguishing diapause from hibernation.
0043055	name:Name:maintenance of dauer	name:Synonym:maintenance of dormancy in the nematode	info:Definition:Maintenance of a nematode during the facultative diapause of the dauer (enduring) larval stage of nematode development.
0071984	name:Name:maintenance of reproductive diapause	info:Definition:The dormancy process that results an organism remaining in reproductive diapause. Reproductive diapause is a form of diapause where the organism itself will remain fully active, including feeding and other routine activities, but the reproductive organs experience a tissue-specific reduction in metabolism, with characteristic triggering and releasing stimuli.
0085014	name:Name:dormancy entry of symbiont in host	info:Definition:Entry into a dormant state of the symbiont within the host organism.
0085015	name:Name:dormancy maintenance of symbiont in host	name:Synonym:non-replicating persistence	name:Synonym:NRP	info:Definition:Any process in which a dormant state is maintained by the symbiont within the host organism.
0085016	name:Name:dormancy exit of symbiont in host	name:Synonym:resuscitation of symbiont	info:Definition:Exit from dormant state, also known as resuscitation, of the symbiont within the host organism.
0030588	name:Name:pseudocleavage	info:Definition:Partial constriction of the cytoplasm of an embryo to form a furrow that resembles a cleavage furrow but does not complete cytokinesis.
0030589	name:Name:pseudocleavage involved in syncytial blastoderm formation	name:Synonym:pseudocleavage during syncytial blastoderm formation	info:Definition:Formation of furrows in the cytoplasm between nuclei during cell cycles in embryos that contribute to the formation of the syncytial blastoderm. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0030590	name:Name:first cell cycle pseudocleavage	info:Definition:A process that occurs during the first cell cycle in an embryo, in which anterior cortical contractions culminate in a single partial constriction of the embryo called the pseudocleavage furrow. An example of this process is found in nematode worms.
0031424	name:Name:keratinization	info:Definition:The process in which the cytoplasm of the outermost cells of the vertebrate epidermis is replaced by keratin. Keratinization occurs in the stratum corneum, feathers, hair, claws, nails, hooves, and horns.
0035073	name:Name:pupariation	name:Synonym:puparium biosynthesis	name:Synonym:puparium formation	info:Definition:The onset of prepupal development when the larval stops crawling, everts its spiracles and the larval cuticle becomes the puparium or pupal case that surrounds the organism for the duration of metamorphosis.
0035074	name:Name:pupation	name:Synonym:head eversion	name:Synonym:prepupal-pupal transition	info:Definition:The act of becoming a pupa, a resting stage in the life cycle of organisms with complete metamorphosis. This event marks the end of the prepupal period and the beginning of the pupal period.
0035889	name:Name:otolith tethering	info:Definition:The attachment of a developing otolith to the kinocilia of tether cells in the inner ear.
0043696	name:Name:dedifferentiation	info:Definition:The process in which a specialized structure (cell, tissue or organ) loses structural or functional features that characterize it in the mature organism, or some other relatively stable phase of the organism's life history. Under certain conditions, these structures can revert back to the features of their ancestors.
0043934	name:Name:sporulation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a spore over time, from its initiation to the mature structure. A spore is a structure that can be used for dissemination, for survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for reproduction.
0075283	name:Name:sporulation resulting in formation of a multicellular or syncytial spore	name:Synonym:multicellular or syncytial spore formation by sporulation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a multicellular or syncytial spore via septations over time, from its initiation to the mature structure.
0044111	name:Name:development involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:development during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring when the organism is in a symbiotic interaction.
0044113	name:Name:development in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:development in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring within the cells or tissues of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down the tissue of the second organism.
0044115	name:Name:development of symbiont involved in interaction with host	name:Synonym:development of symbiont during interaction with host	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring in, on or near the exterior of its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044114	name:Name:development of symbiont in host	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring within the cells or tissues of the host organism. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down host tissue. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044132	name:Name:development of symbiont on or near host	info:Definition:The progression of a symbiont from an initial condition to a later condition, within the cells or tissues of its host organism.
0052093	name:Name:formation of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from host	name:Synonym:formation by organism of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from host	name:Synonym:formation by symbiont of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from host	info:Definition:The assembly by an organism of a cellular component or anatomical structure for the purpose of obtaining nutrients from its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075015	name:Name:formation of infection structure on or near host	name:Synonym:formation by symbiont of infection structure on or near host	info:Definition:The process in which a symbiont structure that serves to infect the host is formed on or near its host organism. It includes physiological, developmental, and morphological changes of the symbiont. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075035	name:Name:maturation of appressorium on or near host	name:Synonym:appressorium maturation on or near host	name:Synonym:maturation of symbiont appressorium on or near host	info:Definition:The process in which specialized features of the symbiont appressorium are acquired post initiation, to aid in infection of the host. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075039	name:Name:establishment of turgor in appressorium	name:Synonym:establishment of turgor in symbiont appressorium on or near host	name:Synonym:formation of turgor in appressorium	name:Synonym:generation of turgor in appressorium	info:Definition:The process in which hydrostatic pressure is increased within the symbiont appressorium to breach the cuticle of the host. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044152	name:Name:development on or near surface of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:development on or near surface of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring on or near the exterior of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044150	name:Name:development of organism on or near symbiont surface	info:Definition:The progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring on or near the exterior of its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052095	name:Name:formation of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:formation of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The assembly by an organism of a cellular component or anatomical structure for the purpose of obtaining nutrients from a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052098	name:Name:formation by host of specialized structure for nutrient acquisition from symbiont	info:Definition:The assembly by an organism of a cellular component or anatomical structure for the purpose of obtaining nutrients from a symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0048066	name:Name:developmental pigmentation	name:Synonym:pigmentation during development	info:Definition:The developmental process that results in the deposition of coloring matter in an organism, tissue or cell.
0048067	name:Name:cuticle pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in the cuticle of an organism.
0048085	name:Name:adult chitin-containing cuticle pigmentation	name:Synonym:adult cuticle pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of the adult pattern of pigmentation in the chitin-containing cuticle of an organism. An example of this is the adult cuticle pigmentation process in Drosophila melanogaster.
0048069	name:Name:eye pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in the eye of an organism.
0048072	name:Name:compound eye pigmentation	info:Definition:Establishment of a pattern of pigment in the compound eye.
0048532	name:Name:anatomical structure arrangement	name:Synonym:anatomical structure organization	name:Synonym:anatomical structure structural organization	name:Synonym:organization of an anatomical structure	name:Synonym:structural organization	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the configuration of the constituent parts of an anatomical structure. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Anatomical structures can be macroscopic such as a carpel, or microscopic such as an acrosome.
0003409	name:Name:optic cup structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of the optic cup. This process pertains to the physical shaping of the rudimentary structure.
0009933	name:Name:meristem structural organization	name:Synonym:meristem organisation	name:Synonym:meristem organization	info:Definition:Organization of a region of tissue in a plant that is composed of one or more undifferentiated cells capable of undergoing mitosis and differentiation, thereby effecting growth and development of a plant by giving rise to more meristem or specialized tissue.
0010358	name:Name:leaf shaping	name:Synonym:leaf structural organization	info:Definition:The developmental process that pertains to the organization of a leaf in three-dimensional space once the structure has initially formed.
0021552	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary structural organization	name:Synonym:isthmus structural organization	name:Synonym:MHB structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary structure. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages. An organizing center at the boundary patterns the midbrain and hindbrain primordia of the neural plate.
0021577	name:Name:hindbrain structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the hindbrain. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The hindbrain is the region consisting of the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Areas of the hindbrain control motor and autonomic functions.
0021581	name:Name:medulla oblongata structural organization	name:Synonym:medulla structural maturation	name:Synonym:myelencephalon structural maturation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the medulla oblongata. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The medulla oblongata lies directly above the spinal cord and controls vital autonomic functions such as digestion, breathing and the control of heart rate.
0021585	name:Name:pons structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the pons. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The pons lies above the medulla and next to the cerebellum. The pons conveys information about movement from the cerebral hemisphere to the cerebellum.
0021589	name:Name:cerebellum structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cerebellum. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The cerebellum is the portion of the brain in the back of the head between the cerebrum and the pons. The cerebellum controls balance for walking and standing, modulates the force and range of movement and is involved in the learning of motor skills.
0021595	name:Name:rhombomere structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the rhombomere structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates.
0021653	name:Name:rhombomere 1 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 1. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021656	name:Name:rhombomere 2 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 2. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021659	name:Name:rhombomere 3 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 3. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021662	name:Name:rhombomere 4 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 4. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021665	name:Name:rhombomere 5 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 5. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021668	name:Name:rhombomere 6 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 6. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021672	name:Name:rhombomere 7 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 7. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021676	name:Name:rhombomere 8 structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to creating the structural organization of rhombomere 8. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in an anterior to posterior order.
0021597	name:Name:central nervous system structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the central nervous system structure. The central nervous system is the core nervous system that serves an integrating and coordinating function. In vertebrates it consists of the brain, spinal cord and spinal nerves. In those invertebrates with a central nervous system it typically consists of a brain, cerebral ganglia and a nerve cord.
0021604	name:Name:cranial nerve structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cranial nerves. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The cranial nerves are composed of twelve pairs of nerves that emanate from the nervous tissue of the hindbrain. These nerves are sensory, motor, or mixed in nature, and provide the motor and general sensory innervation of the head, neck and viscera. They mediate vision, hearing, olfaction and taste and carry the parasympathetic innervation of the autonomic ganglia that control visceral functions.
0021600	name:Name:abducens nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN VI structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the abducens nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The motor function of the abducens nerve is to contract the lateral rectus which results in abduction of the eye.
0021609	name:Name:accessory nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN XI structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the accessory nerve This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The spinal branch of this motor nerve innervates the trapezius and the sternocleidomastoid muscles. The cranial branch joins the vagus nerve and innervates the same targets as the vagus nerve.
0021612	name:Name:facial nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN VII structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the facial nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. This sensory and motor nerve supplies the muscles of facial expression and the expression and taste at the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The principal branches are the superficial opthalmic, buccal, palatine and hyomandibular. The main trunk synapses within pterygopalatine ganglion in the parotid gland and this ganglion then gives of nerve branches which supply the lacrimal gland and the mucous secreting glands of the nasal and oral cavities.
0021617	name:Name:glossopharyngeal nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN IX structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the glossopharyngeal nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. Various sensory and motor branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve supply nerve connections to the pharynx and back of the tongue. The branchial motor component contains motor fibers that innervate muscles that elevate the pharynx and larynx, and the tympanic branch supplies parasympathetic fibers to the otic ganglion.
0021621	name:Name:hypoglossal nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN XII structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the hypoglossal nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. This motor nerve innervates all the intrinsic and all but one of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
0021624	name:Name:oculomotor nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN III structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the oculomotor nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. This motor nerve innervates all extraocular muscles except the superior oblique and the lateral rectus muscles. The superior division supplies the levator palpebrae superioris and superior rectus muscles. The inferior division supplies the medial rectus, inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles. This nerve also innervates the striated muscles of the eyelid. Pupillary constriction and lens movement are mediated by this nerve for near vision. In the orbit the inferior division sends branches that enter the ciliary ganglion where they form functional contacts (synapses) with the ganglion cells. The ganglion cells send nerve fibers into the back of the eye where they travel to ultimately innervate the ciliary muscle and the constrictor pupillae muscle.
0021629	name:Name:olfactory nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN I structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the oculomotor nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The olfactory nerve is a collection of sensory nerve rootlets that extend down from the olfactory bulb to the olfactory mucosa of the upper parts of the nasal cavity. This nerve conducts odor information to the brainstem.
0021633	name:Name:optic nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN II structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the optic nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The sensory optic nerve originates from the bipolar cells of the retina and conducts visual information to the brainstem. The optic nerve exits the back of the eye in the orbit, enters the optic canal, and enters the central nervous system at the optic chiasm (crossing) where the nerve fibers become the optic tract just prior to entering the hindbrain.
0021637	name:Name:trigeminal nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN V structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the oculomotor nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The trigeminal nerve is composed of three large branches. They are the ophthalmic (V1, sensory), maxillary (V2, sensory) and mandibular (V3, motor and sensory) branches. The sensory ophthalmic branch travels through the superior orbital fissure and passes through the orbit to reach the skin of the forehead and top of the head. The maxillary nerve contains sensory branches that reach the pterygopalatine fossa via the inferior orbital fissure (face, cheek and upper teeth) and pterygopalatine canal (soft and hard palate, nasal cavity and pharynx). The motor part of the mandibular branch is distributed to the muscles of mastication, the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly of the digastric. The mandibular nerve also innervates the tensor veli palatini and tensor tympani muscles. The sensory part of the mandibular nerve is composed of branches that carry general sensory information from the mucous membranes of the mouth and cheek, anterior two-thirds of the tongue, lower teeth, skin of the lower jaw, side of the head and scalp and meninges of the anterior and middle cranial fossae.
0021641	name:Name:trochlear nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN IV structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the trochlear nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The trochlear nerve is a motor nerve and is the only cranial nerve to exit the brain dorsally. The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle.
0021645	name:Name:vagus nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN X structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the vagus nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. This nerve is primarily sensory but also has visceromotor components. It originates in the brain stem and controls many autonomic functions of the heart, lungs, stomach, pharynx, larynx, trachea, esophagus and other gastrointestinal tract components. It controls some motor functions such as speech. The sensory branches mediate sensation from the pharynx, larynx, thorax and abdomen; it also innervates taste buds in the epiglottis.
0021649	name:Name:vestibulocochlear nerve structural organization	name:Synonym:CN VII structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the vestibulocochlear nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. This sensory nerve innervates the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear. The vestibular branch innervates the vestibular apparatus that senses head position changes relative to gravity. The auditory branch innervates the cochlear duct, which is connected to the three bony ossicles which transduce sound waves into fluid movement in the cochlea.
0021685	name:Name:cerebellar granular layer structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cerebellar granule layer. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The granular layer is the innermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer contains densely packed small neurons, mostly granule cells. Some Golgi cells are found at the outer border. Granule neurons send parallel fibers to the upper molecular layer, where they synapse with Purkinje cell dendrites. Mossy fibers from the pontine nuclei in the white matter synapse with granule cell axons, Golgi cell axons and unipolar brush interneuron axons at cerebellar glomeruli in the granule cell layer.
0021689	name:Name:cerebellar molecular layer structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cerebellar molecular layer. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the parallel fibers of the granule cells, interneurons such as stellate and basket cells, and the dendrites of the underlying Purkinje cells.
0021693	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell layer structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The Purkinje cell layer lies just underneath the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the neuronal cell bodies of the Purkinje cells that are arranged side by side in a single layer. Candelabrum interneurons are vertically oriented between the Purkinje cells. Purkinje neurons are inhibitory and provide the output of the cerebellar cortex through axons that project into the white matter. Extensive dendritic trees from the Purkinje cells extend upward in a single plane into the molecular layer where they synapse with parallel fibers of granule cells.
0021698	name:Name:cerebellar cortex structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the cerebellar cortex. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The cerebellar cortex is a thin mantle of gray matter that covers the surface of each cerebral hemisphere. It has a characteristic morphology with convolutions (gyri) and crevices (sulci) that have specific functions. Six layers of nerve cells and the nerve pathways that connect them comprise the cerebellar cortex. Together, these regions are responsible for the processes of conscious thought, perception, emotion and memory as well as advanced motor function.
0021716	name:Name:inferior olivary nucleus structural organization	name:Synonym:inferior olive structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the inferior olivary nucleus structure. The inferior olivary nucleus is a capsule-shaped structure in the ventral medulla located just lateral and dorsal to the medullary pyramids. Neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus are the source of climbing fiber input to the cerebellar cortex; these neurons have been implicated in various functions, such as learning and timing of movements.
0021721	name:Name:superior olivary nucleus structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the superior olivary nucleus structure. In mice, the superior olivary nucleus is a small cylindrical mass on the dorsal surface of the lateral part of the trapezoid body of the pons, and it is situated immediately above the inferior olivary nucleus. It receives projections from the cochlear nucleus and thus is involved in the perception of sound.
0035763	name:Name:dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048338	name:Name:mesoderm structural organization	name:Synonym:mesoderm structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the mesoderm. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048331	name:Name:axial mesoderm structural organization	name:Synonym:axial mesoderm structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the axial mesoderm. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048352	name:Name:paraxial mesoderm structural organization	name:Synonym:paraxial mesoderm structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the paraxial mesoderm. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048381	name:Name:lateral mesoderm structural organization	name:Synonym:lateral mesoderm structural organisation	name:Synonym:lateral plate mesoderm structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the lateral mesoderm. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0048402	name:Name:intermediate mesoderm structural organization	name:Synonym:intermediate mesoderm structural organisation	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the intermediate mesoderm. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure.
0060185	name:Name:outer ear unfolding	info:Definition:The opening and spreading out of the outer ear.
0072118	name:Name:pronephros structural organization	name:Synonym:pronephric kidney structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the pronephros. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. In mammals, the pronephros is the first of the three embryonic kidneys to be established and exists only transiently. In lower vertebrates such as fish and amphibia, the pronephros is the fully functional embryonic kidney and is indispensable for larval life.
0072119	name:Name:head kidney structural organization	info:Definition:The process that contributes to the act of creating the structural organization of the head kidney. This process pertains to the physical shaping of a rudimentary structure. The head kidney is a pronephros that consists of fused bilateral lobes located in the anterior part of the kidney.
0048589	name:Name:developmental growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an entire organism, a part of an organism or a cell, where the increase in size or mass has the specific outcome of the progression of the organism over time from one condition to another.
0001832	name:Name:blastocyst growth	info:Definition:An increase in size of a blastocyst due to expansion of the blastocoelic cavity cell shape changes and cell proliferation.
0003248	name:Name:heart capillary growth	info:Definition:The increase in heart capillaries that accompanies physiological hypertrophy of cardiac muscle.
0007446	name:Name:imaginal disc growth	info:Definition:The increase in mass of imaginal discs by cell proliferation prior to metamorphosis. Imaginal discs are epithelial infoldings in the larvae of holometabolous insects that develop into adult structures (legs, antennae, wings, etc.) during metamorphosis from larval to adult form.
0035266	name:Name:meristem growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a meristem, a region of tissue in a plant that is composed of one or more undifferentiated cells capable of undergoing mitosis and differentiation.
0010448	name:Name:vegetative meristem growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a vegetative meristem, a population of undifferentiated cells in a plant shoot which maintains a continuous balance between the production of stem cells and the incorporation of their derivatives into lateral organ primordia.
0010449	name:Name:root meristem growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a root meristem, a population of undifferentiated cells in a plant root which maintains a continuous balance between the production of stem cells and the incorporation of their derivatives into the growth of the root.
0042640	name:Name:anagen	name:Synonym:hair growth	info:Definition:The growth phase of the hair cycle. Lasts, for example, about 3 to 6 years for human scalp hair.
0048630	name:Name:skeletal muscle tissue growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a skeletal muscle. This may be due to a change in the fiber number or size.
0051124	name:Name:synaptic growth at neuromuscular junction	name:Synonym:cholinergic synaptogenesis	info:Definition:The growth of a synapse at a neuromuscular junction, the site of apposition of a motor end plate and the subneural cleft of the skeletal muscle fiber that it innervates.
0060560	name:Name:developmental growth involved in morphogenesis	name:Synonym:differential growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an anatomical structure that contributes to the structure attaining its shape.
0003241	name:Name:growth involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:Developmental growth that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0003401	name:Name:axis elongation	name:Synonym:elongation of an axis	info:Definition:The developmental growth that results in the elongation of a line that defines polarity or symmetry in an anatomical structure.
0003405	name:Name:optic vesicle elongation	info:Definition:The developmental growth that results in the lengthening of the optic vesicle in the posterior direction.
0003416	name:Name:endochondral bone growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an endochondral bone that contributes to the shaping of the bone.
0003430	name:Name:growth plate cartilage chondrocyte growth	name:Synonym:growth plate cartilage chondrocyte hypertrophy	info:Definition:The growth of a growth plate cartilage chondrocyte, where growth contributes to the progression of the chondrocyte over time from one condition to another.
0035001	name:Name:dorsal trunk growth, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:dorsal trunk growth	info:Definition:Growth of epithelial tubes that originate from pits in an open tracheal system and grow towards each other to meet and form a continuous open tube called the dorsal trunk. The dorsal trunk extends from the anterior spiracle to the posterior spiracle of the larva and forms the main airway of the insect tracheal system.
0035015	name:Name:elongation of arista core	info:Definition:The increase in length of the aristal core. The arista is the terminal segment of the antenna and consists of a central core and a series of lateral extensions.
0035016	name:Name:elongation of arista lateral	info:Definition:The increase in length of the aristal laterals. The arista is the terminal segment of the antenna and consists of a central core and a series of lateral extensions.
0035849	name:Name:nephric duct elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the nephric duct grows along its axis. A nephric duct is a tube that drains a primitive kidney.
0044181	name:Name:filamentous growth of a multicellular organism	info:Definition:The process in which a multicellular organism grows in a threadlike, filamentous shape.
0048526	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived wing expansion	name:Synonym:wing expansion	name:Synonym:wing inflation	info:Definition:The process of expanding or inflating the folded imaginal disc-derived pupal wing, and the adhering of the dorsal and ventral surfaces, to form the mature adult wing.
0060186	name:Name:outer ear emergence	name:Synonym:ear elevation	name:Synonym:ear extroversion	name:Synonym:outer ear growth	info:Definition:The growth of the outer ear.
0060649	name:Name:mammary gland bud elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the mammary gland bud grows along its axis.
0060677	name:Name:ureteric bud elongation	info:Definition:The process in which the ureteric bud grows along its axis.
0060763	name:Name:mammary duct terminal end bud growth	info:Definition:The morphogenetic growth of the large, club-shaped terminal end of a mammary gland duct during prepubertal growth and during puberty.
0061137	name:Name:bud dilation	info:Definition:The process in which a branch bud increases radially. A branch bud is the initial area of outgrowth in the formation of a new branch.
0090214	name:Name:spongiotrophoblast layer developmental growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of the spongiotrophoblast layer of the placenta where the increase in size or mass contributes to the progression of that layer over time from its formation to its mature state.
0048646	name:Name:anatomical structure formation involved in morphogenesis	name:Synonym:formation of an anatomical structure involved in morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of an anatomical structure from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable. An anatomical structure is any biological entity that occupies space and is distinguished from its surroundings. Anatomical structures can be macroscopic such as a carpel, or microscopic such as an acrosome.
0001525	name:Name:angiogenesis	name:Synonym:blood vessel formation from pre-existing blood vessels	info:Definition:Blood vessel formation when new vessels emerge from the proliferation of pre-existing blood vessels.
0002040	name:Name:sprouting angiogenesis	info:Definition:The extension of new blood vessels from existing capillaries into avascular tissues resulting from the proliferation of blood vessel endothelial cells.
0002041	name:Name:intussusceptive angiogenesis	info:Definition:The formation of new blood vessels as a result of the insertion and extension of lumenal tissue pillars.
0060055	name:Name:angiogenesis involved in wound healing	info:Definition:Blood vessel formation when new vessels emerge from the proliferation of pre-existing blood vessels and contribute to the series of events that restore integrity to a damaged tissue, following an injury.
0060978	name:Name:angiogenesis involved in coronary vascular morphogenesis	name:Synonym:angiogenesis involved in cardiac vascular morphogenesis	name:Synonym:angiogenesis involved in heart vascular morphogenesis	name:Synonym:coronary blood vessel angiogenesis	name:Synonym:coronary vasculature angiogenesis	info:Definition:Blood vessel formation in the heart when new vessels emerge from the proliferation of pre-existing blood vessels.
0001704	name:Name:formation of primary germ layer	info:Definition:The formation of the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm during gastrulation.
0001705	name:Name:ectoderm formation	info:Definition:The formation of ectoderm during gastrulation.
0001706	name:Name:endoderm formation	name:Synonym:endoblast formation	info:Definition:The formation of the endoderm during gastrulation.
0001707	name:Name:mesoderm formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the mesoderm. This process pertains to the initial formation of the structure from unspecified parts.
0001756	name:Name:somitogenesis	name:Synonym:formation of mesodermal clusters	info:Definition:The formation of mesodermal clusters that are arranged segmentally along the anterior posterior axis of an embryo.
0001825	name:Name:blastocyst formation	info:Definition:The initial formation of a blastocyst from a solid ball of cells known as a morula.
0003188	name:Name:heart valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a heart valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003189	name:Name:aortic valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the aortic valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003190	name:Name:atrioventricular valve formation	name:Synonym:AV valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the atrioventricular valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003191	name:Name:coronary sinus valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the coronary sinus valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003192	name:Name:mitral valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the mitral valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003193	name:Name:pulmonary valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the pulmonary valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003194	name:Name:sinoatrial valve formation	name:Synonym:SA valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the sinoatrial valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003195	name:Name:tricuspid valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the tricuspid valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003196	name:Name:ventriculo bulbo valve formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the ventriculo bulbo valve from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0003207	name:Name:cardiac chamber formation	name:Synonym:heart chamber formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a cardiac chamber from unspecified parts. A cardiac chamber is an enclosed cavity within the heart.
0003210	name:Name:cardiac atrium formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a cardiac atrium from unspecified parts. A cardiac atrium receives blood from a vein and pumps it to a cardiac ventricle.
0003211	name:Name:cardiac ventricle formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a cardiac ventricle from unspecified parts. A cardiac ventricle receives blood from a cardiac atrium and pumps it out of the heart.
0003234	name:Name:bulbus arteriosus formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the bulbus arteriosus from unspecified parts. The bulbus arteriosus is an elastic chamber of the heart.
0003237	name:Name:sinus venosus formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the sinus venosus from unspecified parts. The sinus venosus is a heart chamber attached to the atrium on the venous side of the embryonic heart.
0003240	name:Name:conus arteriosus formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the conus arteriosus from unspecified parts. The conus arteriosus is a valved chamber with thick muscular walls stemming from the ventricle and connecting to the pulmonary trunk.
0003272	name:Name:endocardial cushion formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of an endocardial cushion. The endocardial cushion is a specialized region of mesenchymal cells that will give rise to the heart septa and valves.
0003315	name:Name:heart rudiment formation	name:Synonym:heart cone formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the heart rudiment.
0003403	name:Name:optic vesicle formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the optic vesicle from the lateral wall of the forebrain. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the vesicle and ends when the vesicle has evaginated. The optic vesicle is the evagination of neurectoderm that precedes formation of the optic cup.
0003408	name:Name:optic cup formation involved in camera-type eye development	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the optic cup, a two-walled vesicle formed from the optic vesicle.
0007349	name:Name:cellularization	info:Definition:The separation of a multi-nucleate cell or syncytium into individual cells. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster embryo development.
0009558	name:Name:embryo sac cellularization	name:Synonym:cellularization of the embryo sac	name:Synonym:female gametophyte cellularization	name:Synonym:megagametophyte cellularization	info:Definition:The process in which the eight-nucleate single celled female gametophyte develops into the seven-celled female gametophyte. This mature structure contains two synergid cells and an egg cell at the micropylar end, and three antipodal cells at the other end. A binucleate endosperm mother cell is formed at the center. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010342	name:Name:endosperm cellularization	name:Synonym:cellularization of endosperm	info:Definition:The separation of the multi-nucleate endosperm into individual cells. In many plant species, the endosperm that nurtures the embryo in the seed initially develops as a syncytium. This syncytial phase ends with simultaneous partitioning of the multi-nucleate cytoplasm into individual cells, a process referred to as cellularization.
0007370	name:Name:ventral furrow formation	info:Definition:Formation of a ventral indentation (furrow) from the blastoderm epithelium, which is internalized to form a tube in the interior of the embryo, marking the start of gastrulation.
0007376	name:Name:cephalic furrow formation	info:Definition:Formation of a partial necklace of inturning tissue on the lateral sides of the embryo, along the dorsal-ventral axis. This furrow demarcates head from thorax in the developing protostome.
0010311	name:Name:lateral root formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a lateral root. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0010346	name:Name:shoot formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a shoot. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0010223	name:Name:secondary shoot formation	name:Synonym:auxiliary shoot formation	name:Synonym:axillary shoot formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to secondary (or auxiliary or axillary) shoots in plants. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. These secondary shoots originate from secondary meristems initiated in the axils of leaf primordia. Axillary meristems function like the shoot apical meristem of the primary shoot initating the development of lateral organs.
0010376	name:Name:stomatal complex formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the stomatal complex. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The stomatal complex is the stomatal guard cells and their associated epidermal cells.
0010434	name:Name:bract formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a bract. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. A bract is a leaf, usually different in form from the foliage leaves, subtending a flower or inflorescence.
0010618	name:Name:aerenchyma formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to aerenchyma, parenchyma tissue containing particularly large intercellular spaces of schizogenous or lysigenous origin. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0010842	name:Name:retina layer formation	name:Synonym:retinal lamination	name:Synonym:retinal layer formation	info:Definition:The process in which the vertebrate retina is organized into three laminae: the outer nuclear layer (ONL), which contains photoreceptor nuclei; the inner nuclear layer (INL), which contains amacrine, bipolar and horizontal cells; and the retinal ganglion cell (RGC) layer. Between the inner and outer nuclear layers, the outer plexiform layer (OPL) contains connections between the photoreceptors and bipolar and horizontal cells. The inner plexiform layer (IPL) is positioned between the INL and the ganglion cell layer and contains the dendrites of RGCs and processes of bipolar and amacrine cells. Spanning all layers of the retina are the radially oriented Mueller glia.
0010927	name:Name:cellular component assembly involved in morphogenesis	info:Definition:The cellular component assembly that is part of the initial shaping of the component during its developmental progression.
0003364	name:Name:lamellipodium assembly involved in mesendodermal cell migration	info:Definition:Formation of a lamellipodium, a thin sheetlike extension of the surface of a migrating cell that contributes to the directed self-propelled movement of a mesendodermal cell.
0010208	name:Name:pollen wall assembly	name:Synonym:pollen wall formation	info:Definition:The formation of reticulate pollen wall pattern consisting of two layers, exine and intine.
0030239	name:Name:myofibril assembly	info:Definition:Formation of myofibrils, the repeating units of striated muscle.
0030913	name:Name:paranodal junction assembly	name:Synonym:paranodal axoglial junction formation	name:Synonym:paranodal junction biosynthesis	name:Synonym:paranodal junction formation	info:Definition:Formation of the junction between an axon and the glial cell that forms the myelin sheath. Paranodal junctions form at each paranode, i.e. at the ends of the unmyelinated nodes of Ranvier.
0032288	name:Name:myelin assembly	name:Synonym:myelin formation	info:Definition:The process in which the wraps of cell membrane that constitute myelin are laid down around an axon in the central or peripheral nervous system.
0035083	name:Name:cilium axoneme assembly	name:Synonym:cilium axoneme biogenesis	info:Definition:The assembly of a the bundle of microtubules and associated proteins that forms the core of cilia in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for their movements.
0035231	name:Name:cytoneme assembly	name:Synonym:cytoneme biogenesis	info:Definition:Formation of a cytoneme, a long, thin and polarized actin-based cytoplasmic extension that projects from a cell.
0042244	name:Name:spore wall assembly	name:Synonym:spore coat biosynthesis	name:Synonym:spore coat biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:spore wall formation	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a spore wall; a spore wall is the specialized envelope lying outside the cell membrane of a spore.
0042384	name:Name:cilium assembly	name:Synonym:ciliogenesis	name:Synonym:cilium biogenesis	info:Definition:The assembly of a cilium, a specialized eukaryotic organelle that consists of a filiform extrusion of the cell surface. Each cilium is bounded by an extrusion of the cytoplasmic membrane, and contains a regular longitudinal array of microtubules, anchored basally in a centriole.
0071688	name:Name:striated muscle myosin thick filament assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of proteins to form the myosin-based thick filaments of myofibrils in striated muscle.
0014023	name:Name:neural rod formation	info:Definition:The formation of a solid rod of neurectoderm derived from the neural keel. The neural rod is roughly circular in cross section. Neural rod formation occurs during primary neurulation in teleosts.
0014025	name:Name:neural keel formation	info:Definition:The formation of a thickened region of the neurectoderm that is roughly triangular in cross section. The neural keel develops from the neural plate and develops into the neural rod. Neural keel formation occurs during primary neurulation in teleosts.
0014028	name:Name:notochord formation	info:Definition:The formation of the notochord from the chordamesoderm. The notochord is composed of large cells packed within a firm connective tissue sheath and is found in all chordates at the ventral surface of the neural tube. In vertebrates, the notochord contributes to the vertebral column.
0021501	name:Name:prechordal plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of the prechordal plate. The prechordal plate is a thickening of the endoderm at the cranial end of the primitive streak formed by the involution of Spemann's organizer cells. The prechordal plate and the notochord induce the formation of the neural plate from the overlying ectodermal cells.
0021502	name:Name:neural fold elevation formation	info:Definition:The process in which the lateral borders of the neural plate begin to migrate upwards to form the neural folds, caused by the proliferation of the underlying mesoderm.
0021504	name:Name:neural fold hinge point formation	name:Synonym:neural fold furrowing	info:Definition:The formation of the median and lateral hinge points in the neural folds. These are created by apical constriction and basal expansion of the underlying neural cells. The median hinge point extends for the entire length of the neural tube, and the lateral hinge points do not form in the spinal cord region of the neural tube.
0021508	name:Name:floor plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of a ventral region of glial cells in the neural tube that provides inductive signals for the specification of neuronal cell types. The floor plate is evident at the ventral midline by the neural fold stage.
0021509	name:Name:roof plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of a single row of glia at the dorsal midline of the developing neural tube. This region provides inductive signals for the specification of neuronal cell types and of the specification of neural crest cells. The cells comprising the roof plate are the precursors to radial glial cells.
0021556	name:Name:central nervous system formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the central nervous system. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The central nervous system is the core nervous system that serves an integrating and coordinating function. In vertebrates it consists of the brain, spinal cord and spinal nerves. In those invertebrates with a central nervous system it typically consists of a brain, cerebral ganglia and a nerve cord.
0021576	name:Name:hindbrain formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the hindbrain. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The hindbrain is the region consisting of the medulla, pons and cerebellum. Areas of the hindbrain control motor and autonomic functions.
0021580	name:Name:medulla oblongata formation	name:Synonym:medulla biosynthesis	name:Synonym:medulla formation	name:Synonym:myelencephalon biosynthesis	name:Synonym:myelencephalon formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the medulla oblongata. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The medulla oblongata lies directly above the spinal cord and controls vital autonomic functions such as digestion, breathing and the control of heart rate.
0021584	name:Name:pons formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the pons. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The pons lies above the medulla and next to the cerebellum. The pons conveys information about movement from the cerebral hemisphere to the cerebellum.
0021588	name:Name:cerebellum formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cerebellum. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The cerebellum is the portion of the brain in the back of the head between the cerebrum and the pons. The cerebellum controls balance for walking and standing, modulates the force and range of movement and is involved in the learning of motor skills.
0021594	name:Name:rhombomere formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the rhombomere. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates.
0021652	name:Name:rhombomere 1 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 1. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021657	name:Name:rhombomere 2 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 2. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021660	name:Name:rhombomere 3 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 3. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021663	name:Name:rhombomere 4 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 4. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021666	name:Name:rhombomere 5 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 5. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021669	name:Name:rhombomere 6 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 6. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021673	name:Name:rhombomere 7 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 7. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021677	name:Name:rhombomere 8 formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to rhombomere 8. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021603	name:Name:cranial nerve formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cranial nerves. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The cranial nerves are composed of twelve pairs of nerves that emanate from the nervous tissue of the hindbrain. These nerves are sensory, motor, or mixed in nature, and provide the motor and general sensory innervation of the head, neck and viscera. They mediate vision, hearing, olfaction and taste and carry the parasympathetic innervation of the autonomic ganglia that control visceral functions.
0021599	name:Name:abducens nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN VI biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN VI formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the abducens nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The motor function of the abducens nerve is to contract the lateral rectus which results in abduction of the eye.
0021608	name:Name:accessory nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN XI biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN XI formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the accessory nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The spinal branch of this motor nerve innervates the trapezius and the sternocleidomastoid muscles. The cranial branch joins the vagus nerve and innervates the same targets as the vagus nerve.
0021611	name:Name:facial nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN VII biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN VII formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the facial nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. This sensory and motor nerve supplies the muscles of facial expression and the expression and taste at the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The principal branches are the superficial opthalmic, buccal, palatine and hyomandibular. The main trunk synapses within pterygopalatine ganglion in the parotid gland and this ganglion then gives of nerve branches which supply the lacrimal gland and the mucous secreting glands of the nasal and oral cavities.
0021616	name:Name:glossopharyngeal nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN IX biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN IX formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the glossopharyngeal nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. Various sensory and motor branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve supply nerve connections to the pharynx and back of the tongue. The branchial motor component contains motor fibers that innervate muscles that elevate the pharynx and larynx, and the tympanic branch supplies parasympathetic fibers to the otic ganglion.
0021620	name:Name:hypoglossal nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN XII biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN XII formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the hypoglossal nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. This motor nerve innervates all the intrinsic and all but one of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
0021623	name:Name:oculomotor nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN III biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN III formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the oculomotor nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. This motor nerve innervates all extraocular muscles except the superior oblique and the lateral rectus muscles. The superior division supplies the levator palpebrae superioris and superior rectus muscles. The inferior division supplies the medial rectus, inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles. This nerve also innervates the striated muscles of the eyelid. Pupillary constriction and lens movement are mediated by this nerve for near vision. In the orbit the inferior division sends branches that enter the ciliary ganglion where they form functional contacts (synapses) with the ganglion cells. The ganglion cells send nerve fibers into the back of the eye where they travel to ultimately innervate the ciliary muscle and the constrictor pupillae muscle.
0021628	name:Name:olfactory nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN I biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN I formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the olfactory nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The olfactory nerve is a collection of sensory nerve rootlets that extend down from the olfactory bulb to the olfactory mucosa of the upper parts of the nasal cavity. This nerve conducts odor information to the brainstem.
0021634	name:Name:optic nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN II biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN II formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the optic nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The sensory optic nerve originates from the bipolar cells of the retina and conducts visual information to the brainstem. The optic nerve exits the back of the eye in the orbit, enters the optic canal, and enters the central nervous system at the optic chiasm (crossing) where the nerve fibers become the optic tract just prior to entering the hindbrain.
0021638	name:Name:trigeminal nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN V biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN V formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the trigeminal nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The trigeminal nerve is composed of three large branches. They are the ophthalmic (V1, sensory), maxillary (V2, sensory) and mandibular (V3, motor and sensory) branches. The sensory ophthalmic branch travels through the superior orbital fissure and passes through the orbit to reach the skin of the forehead and top of the head. The maxillary nerve contains sensory branches that reach the pterygopalatine fossa via the inferior orbital fissure (face, cheek and upper teeth) and pterygopalatine canal (soft and hard palate, nasal cavity and pharynx). The motor part of the mandibular branch is distributed to the muscles of mastication, the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly of the digastric. The mandibular nerve also innervates the tensor veli palatini and tensor tympani muscles. The sensory part of the mandibular nerve is composed of branches that carry general sensory information from the mucous membranes of the mouth and cheek, anterior two-thirds of the tongue, lower teeth, skin of the lower jaw, side of the head and scalp and meninges of the anterior and middle cranial fossae.
0021642	name:Name:trochlear nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN IV biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN IV formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the trochlear nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The trochlear nerve is a motor nerve and is the only cranial nerve to exit the brain dorsally. The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle.
0021646	name:Name:vagus nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN X biosynthesis	name:Synonym:CN X formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the vagus nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. This nerve is primarily sensory but also has visceromotor components. It originates in the brain stem and controls many autonomic functions of the heart, lungs, stomach, pharynx, larynx, trachea, esophagus and other gastrointestinal tract components. It controls some motor functions such as speech. The sensory branches mediate sensation from the pharynx, larynx, thorax and abdomen; it also innervates taste buds in the epiglottis.
0021650	name:Name:vestibulocochlear nerve formation	name:Synonym:CN VII formation 	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the vestibulocochlear nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. This sensory nerve innervates the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear. The vestibular branch innervates the vestibular apparatus that senses head position changes relative to gravity. The auditory branch innervates the cochlear duct, which is connected to the three bony ossicles which transduce sound waves into fluid movement in the cochlea.
0021684	name:Name:cerebellar granular layer formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cerebellar granule layer. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The granular layer is the innermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer contains densely packed small neurons, mostly granule cells. Some Golgi cells are found at the outer border. Granule neurons send parallel fibers to the upper molecular layer, where they synapse with Purkinje cell dendrites. Mossy fibers from the pontine nuclei in the white matter synapse with granule cell axons, Golgi cell axons and unipolar brush interneuron axons at cerebellar glomeruli in the granule cell layer.
0021688	name:Name:cerebellar molecular layer formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cerebellar molecular layer. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the parallel fibers of the granule cells, interneurons such as stellate and basket cells, and the dendrites of the underlying Purkinje cells.
0021694	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell layer formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The Purkinje cell layer lies just underneath the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the neuronal cell bodies of the Purkinje cells that are arranged side by side in a single layer. Candelabrum interneurons are vertically oriented between the Purkinje cells. Purkinje neurons are inhibitory and provide the output of the cerebellar cortex through axons that project into the white matter. Extensive dendritic trees from the Purkinje cells extend upward in a single plane into the molecular layer where they synapse with parallel fibers of granule cells.
0021697	name:Name:cerebellar cortex formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the cerebellar cortex. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The cerebellar cortex is a thin mantle of gray matter that covers the surface of each cerebral hemisphere. It has a characteristic morphology with convolutions (gyri) and crevices (sulci) that have specific functions. Six layers of nerve cells and the nerve pathways that connect them comprise the cerebellar cortex. Together, these regions are responsible for the processes of conscious thought, perception, emotion and memory as well as advanced motor function.
0021705	name:Name:locus ceruleus formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the locus ceruleus. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. In mice, the locus ceruleus is a dense cluster of neurons within the dorsorostral pons. This nucleus is the major location of neurons that release norepinephrine throughout the brain, and is responsible for physiological responses to stress and panic.
0021715	name:Name:inferior olivary nucleus formation	name:Synonym:inferior olive biosynthesis	name:Synonym:inferior olive formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the inferior olivary nucleus. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The inferior olivary nucleus is a capsule-shaped structure in the ventral medulla located just lateral and dorsal to the medullary pyramids. Neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus are the source of climbing fiber input to the cerebellar cortex; these neurons have been implicated in various functions, such as learning and timing of movements.
0021720	name:Name:superior olivary nucleus formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the superior olivary nucleus. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. In mice, the superior olivary nucleus is a small cylindrical mass on the dorsal surface of the lateral part of the trapezoid body of the pons, and it is situated immediately above the inferior olivary nucleus. It receives projections from the cochlear nucleus and thus is involved in the perception of sound.
0021819	name:Name:layer formation in cerebral cortex	name:Synonym:cerebral cortex lamination	info:Definition:The detachment of cells from radial glial fibers at the appropriate time when they cease to migrate and form distinct layer in the cerebral cortex.
0021990	name:Name:neural plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of the flat, thickened layer of ectodermal cells known as the neural plate. The underlying dorsal mesoderm signals the ectodermal cells above it to elongate into columnar neural plate cells. The neural plate subsequently develops into the neural tube, which gives rise to the central nervous system.
0030220	name:Name:platelet formation	name:Synonym:platelet extrusion	info:Definition:The process in which platelets bud from long processes extended by megakaryocytes.
0030916	name:Name:otic vesicle formation	name:Synonym:otocyst biosynthesis	name:Synonym:otocyst formation	info:Definition:The process resulting in the transition of the otic placode into the otic vesicle, a transient embryonic structure formed during development of the vertebrate inner ear.
0032475	name:Name:otolith formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to an otolith. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0035148	name:Name:tube formation	name:Synonym:lumen formation in an anatomical structure	name:Synonym:tube lumen formation	info:Definition:Creation of the central hole of a tube in an anatomical structure through which gases and/or liquids flow.
0035149	name:Name:lumen formation, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:tracheal lumen formation	info:Definition:Creation of the central hole of a tube in an open tracheal system through which gases flow.
0060605	name:Name:tube lumen cavitation	info:Definition:The formation of a lumen by hollowing out a solid rod or cord.
0060606	name:Name:tube closure	info:Definition:Creation of the central hole of a tube in an anatomical structure by sealing the edges of an epithelial fold.
0072175	name:Name:epithelial tube formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of an epithelial tube.
0035202	name:Name:tracheal pit formation in open tracheal system	name:Synonym:tracheal placode invagination	name:Synonym:tracheal sac formation	info:Definition:Formation of the tracheal pits, the first tube-like structures to form in the open tracheal system. Once cells are determined to their tracheal cell fate, the tracheal pits arise by invagination of each ectodermal cluster of tracheal placode cells, between 5 and 7 hours after egg laying. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0035474	name:Name:selective angioblast sprouting	info:Definition:The segregation of angioblasts into discrete arterial and venous vessels from one common precursor vessel.
0035764	name:Name:dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0035802	name:Name:adrenal cortex formation	name:Synonym:adrenal gland cortex formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the adrenal cortex. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The adrenogonadal primordium from which the adrenal cortex is formed derives from a condensation of coelomic epithelial cells (the urogenital ridge; the same structure from which gonads and kidney also originate).
0048645	name:Name:organ formation	name:Synonym:initiation of an organ primordium	name:Synonym:organ primordium initiation	info:Definition:The process pertaining to the initial formation of an organ from unspecified parts. The process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure, such as inductive events, and ends when the structural rudiment of the organ is recognizable, such as a condensation of mesenchymal cells into the organ rudiment. Organs are a natural part or structure in an animal or a plant, capable of performing some special action (termed its function), which is essential to the life or well-being of the whole. The heart and lungs are organs of animals, and the petal and leaf are organs of plants. In animals the organs are generally made up of several tissues, one of which usually predominates, and determines the principal function of the organ.
0010338	name:Name:leaf formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a leaf. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0048797	name:Name:swim bladder formation	name:Synonym:gas bladder biosynthesis	name:Synonym:gas bladder formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the swim bladder. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The swim bladder is used by some fishes to maintain buoyancy and may function in addition as a sound producing organ, a sound receptor, and a respiratory organ.
0060431	name:Name:primary lung bud formation	name:Synonym:lung formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the foregut region specified to become the lung forms the initial left and right buds.
0060440	name:Name:trachea formation	info:Definition:The process pertaining to the initial formation of a trachea from unspecified parts. The process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the discrete structure and ends when the trachea is recognizable. The trachea is the portion of the airway that attaches to the bronchi as it branches.
0060914	name:Name:heart formation	name:Synonym:cardiogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the heart from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the heart field and the arrival of cardiac neural crest to the heart region. The process ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable.
0061130	name:Name:pancreatic bud formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which the foregut region specified to become the pancreas forms a bud.
0048847	name:Name:adenohypophysis formation	name:Synonym:adenophysis biosynthesis	name:Synonym:adenophysis formation	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary biosynthesis	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary formation	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary gland biosynthesis	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary gland formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to adenohypophysis. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The adenohypophysis is the anterior part of the pituitary. It secretes a variety of hormones and its function is regulated by the hypothalamus.
0048849	name:Name:neurohypophysis formation	name:Synonym:neurophysis biosynthesis	name:Synonym:neurophysis formation	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary biosynthesis	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary formation	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary gland biosynthesis	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary gland formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to neurohypophysis. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The neurohypophysis is the part of the pituitary gland that secretes hormones involved in blood pressure regulation.
0048851	name:Name:hypophysis formation	name:Synonym:hypophysis biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pituitary gland biosynthesis	name:Synonym:pituitary gland formation	info:Definition:The process in which the anatomical structures of the hypophysis are generated and organized. The hypophysis is an endocrine gland that secretes hormones that regulate many other glands.
0048859	name:Name:formation of anatomical boundary	info:Definition:The process in which the limits of an anatomical structure are generated. An anatomical structure is any biological entity that occupies space and is distinguished from its surroundings. Anatomical structures can be macroscopic such as a carpel, or microscopic such as an acrosome.
0007358	name:Name:establishment of central gap gene boundaries	info:Definition:Specification of the borders of central gap gene expression mediated largely by the effects of other gap genes; in insects this is exemplified by knirps repression of Kruppel.
0007361	name:Name:establishment of posterior gap gene boundaries	info:Definition:Specification of the borders of posterior gap gene expression mediated largely by the effects of other gap genes; in insects this is exemplified by hunchback and tailless repression of knirps.
0007364	name:Name:establishment of terminal gap gene boundary	info:Definition:Specification of the borders of terminal gap gene expression mediated largely by the effects of other gap genes.
0021654	name:Name:rhombomere boundary formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a rhombomere boundary. This process pertains to the initial formation of a boundary delimiting a rhombomere. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon that are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021906	name:Name:hindbrain-spinal cord boundary formation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the formation of the hindbrain-spinal cord boundary.
0022006	name:Name:zona limitans intrathalamica formation	name:Synonym:zli biosynthesis	name:Synonym:zli formation	info:Definition:The formation of the narrow stripe of cells that lies between the prospective dorsal and ventral thalami. This boundary contains signals that pattern the prethalamic and thalamic territories of the future mid-diencephalon.
0045317	name:Name:equator specification	info:Definition:The formation and development of the equator that forms the boundary between the photoreceptors in the dorsal sector of the eye and those in the ventral sector, dividing the eye into dorsal and ventral halves.
0060288	name:Name:formation of a compartment boundary	name:Synonym:compartment boundary formation	info:Definition:Formation of a lineage restriction boundary within a developing tissue which does not correspond to some morphological barrier.
0060061	name:Name:Spemann organizer formation	name:Synonym:Spemann's organizer formation	name:Synonym:Spemann-Mangold organizer formation	info:Definition:Formation of the specialized region on the dorsalmost side of the embryo that acts as the main signaling center establishing the vertebrate body plan.
0060062	name:Name:Spemann organizer formation at the dorsal lip of the blastopore	name:Synonym:Spemann's organizer formation at the dorsal lip of the blastopore	name:Synonym:Spemann-Mangold organizer formation at the dorsal lip of the blastopore	info:Definition:Formation of the specialized region at the dorsal lip of the blatopore of the embryo that acts as the main signaling center establishing the vertebrate body plan.
0060063	name:Name:Spemann organizer formation at the embryonic shield	name:Synonym:Spemann's organizer formation at the embryonic shield	name:Synonym:Spemann-Mangold organizer formation at the embryonic shield	info:Definition:Formation of the specialized region of the embryonic shield of the embryo that acts as the main signaling center establishing the teleost body plan.
0060064	name:Name:Spemann organizer formation at the anterior end of the primitive streak	name:Synonym:Spemann organizer formation in amniotes	name:Synonym:Spemann's organizer formation at the anterior end of the primitive streak	name:Synonym:Spemann-Mangold organizer formation at the anterior end of the primitive streak	info:Definition:Formation of the specialized region at the anterior end of the primitive streak of the embryo that acts as the main signaling center establishing the body plan.
0060174	name:Name:limb bud formation	name:Synonym:limb formation	name:Synonym:limbbud formation	info:Definition:The process pertaining to the initial formation of a limb bud from unspecified parts. This process begins with the formation of a local condensation of mesenchyme cells within the prospective limb field, and ends when a limb bud is recognizable.
0060214	name:Name:endocardium formation	info:Definition:Formation of the endocardium of the heart. The endocardium is an anatomical structure comprised of an endothelium and an extracellular matrix that forms the innermost layer of tissue of the heart, and lines the heart chambers.
0060343	name:Name:trabecula formation	name:Synonym:trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:trabeculation	info:Definition:The process of creating a trabecula in an organ. A trabecula is a small, often microscopic, tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod, which generally has a mechanical function. Trabecula are usually but not necessarily, composed of dense collagenous tissue.
0060344	name:Name:liver trabecula formation	name:Synonym:liver trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:liver trabeculation	info:Definition:The process of creating a trabecula in the liver. A trabecula is a tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod.
0060345	name:Name:spleen trabecula formation	name:Synonym:spleen trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:spleen trabeculation	info:Definition:The process of creating a trabecula in the spleen. A trabecula is a tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod.
0060346	name:Name:bone trabecula formation	name:Synonym:bone trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:bone trabeculation	name:Synonym:skeletal trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:skeletal trabecula formation	name:Synonym:skeletal trabeculation	info:Definition:The process of creating a trabecula in the bone. A trabecula is a tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod.
0060347	name:Name:heart trabecula formation	name:Synonym:cardiac trabecula formation	name:Synonym:cardiac trabeculation	name:Synonym:heart trabecula biogenesis	name:Synonym:heart trabeculation	info:Definition:The process of creating a trabecula in the heart. A trabecula is a tissue element in the form of a small beam, strut or rod.
0060464	name:Name:lung lobe formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a lung lobe from unspecified parts. This process begins with the specific processes that contribute to the appearance of the lobe and ends when the structural rudiment is recognizable. A lung lobe is a projection that extends from the lung.
0060592	name:Name:mammary gland formation	name:Synonym:mammary bud formation	name:Synonym:mammary line formation	name:Synonym:mammary placode formation	name:Synonym:mammary sprout formation	info:Definition:The process pertaining to the initial formation of the mammary gland from unspecified parts. The process begins with formation of the mammary line and ends when the solid mammary bud invades the primary mammary mesenchyme.
0060594	name:Name:mammary gland specification	name:Synonym:mammary line specification	info:Definition:The regionalization process in which the mammary line is specified. The mammary line is a ridge of epidermal cells that will form the mammary placodes.
0060615	name:Name:mammary gland bud formation	info:Definition:The morphogenetic process in which a bud forms from the mammary placode. A mammary bud is bulb of epithelial cells that is distinct from the surrounding epidermis.
0060659	name:Name:nipple sheath formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the nipple sheath from the unspecified epidermis. This process begins with a circular ingrowth of the epidermis around the region of the mammary sprout. It ends before the region begins to elevate.
0060661	name:Name:submandibular salivary gland formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a submandibular salivary gland. This process begins with a thickening of the epithelium next to the tongue and ends when a bud linked to the oral surface is formed.
0060714	name:Name:labyrinthine layer formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the labyrinthine layer of the placenta.
0060788	name:Name:ectodermal placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which an ectodermal placode forms. An ectodermal placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that is the primordium of many structures derived from the ectoderm.
0001743	name:Name:optic placode formation	info:Definition:The initial developmental process that will lead to the formation of an eye.
0030910	name:Name:olfactory placode formation	info:Definition:The formation of a thickening of the neural ectoderm in the head region of the vertebrate embryo which develops into the olfactory region of the nasal cavity.
0043049	name:Name:otic placode formation	info:Definition:The initial developmental process that will lead to the formation of the vertebrate inner ear. The otic placode forms as a thickening of the head ectoderm adjacent to the developing hindbrain.
0060596	name:Name:mammary placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the mammary placode forms. The mammary placode is a transient lens shaped structure that will give rise to the mammary bud proper.
0060789	name:Name:hair follicle placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which a hair placode forms. An hair follicle placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that will give rise to the hair follicle bud.
0060790	name:Name:tooth placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the tooth placode forms. An tooth placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that will give rise to the tooth bud.
0060791	name:Name:sebaceous gland placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which a sebaceous gland placode forms. A sebaceous gland placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that will give rise to the sebaceous gland bud.
0060793	name:Name:sweat gland placode formation	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the sweat gland placode forms. An sweat gland placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that will give rise to the sweat gland bud.
0060876	name:Name:semicircular canal formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the semicircular canal from the otic vesicle. This process begins with the regionalization of the vesicle that specifies the area where the vesicles will form and continues through the process of fusion which forms the initial tubes.
0060900	name:Name:embryonic camera-type eye formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a camera-type eye from unspecified neurectoderm. This process begins with the differentiation of cells that form the optic field and ends when the optic cup has attained its shape.
0061195	name:Name:taste bud formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the taste bud from unspecified parts. The taste bud is a specialized area of the tongue that contains taste receptors.
0061198	name:Name:fungiform papilla formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a spongiform papilla from unspecified parts. The fungiform papilla is a mushroom-shaped papilla of the tongue.
0071730	name:Name:beak formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to the beak. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts. The avian beak is an external anatomical structure, in the head region, that is adapted for feeding self and young, catching prey, probing, etc. It encompasses, but is not restricted to, the maxilla, mandible, maxillary ramaphotheca, mandibular ramaphotheca, nostril, nasal fossa, nasal bones, egg tooth and rictus.
0072003	name:Name:kidney rudiment formation	name:Synonym:kidney anlage formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a kidney rudiment from unspecified parts. A kidney is an organ that filters the blood and excretes the end products of body metabolism in the form of urine.
0072116	name:Name:pronephros formation	name:Synonym:pronephric kidney formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the pronephros. In mammals, the pronephros is the first of the three embryonic kidneys to be established and exists only transiently. In lower vertebrates such as fish and amphibia, the pronephros is the fully functional embryonic kidney and is indispensable for larval life.
0072033	name:Name:renal vesicle formation	name:Synonym:nephron epithelium formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the renal vesicle from condensed mesenchymal cells. The renal vesicle is the primordial structure of the nephron epithelium, and is formed by the condensation of mesenchymal cells.
0061262	name:Name:mesonephric renal vesicle formation	name:Synonym:mesonephros formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the mesonephros.
0072093	name:Name:metanephric renal vesicle formation	name:Synonym:metanephros formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the metanephros.
0072104	name:Name:glomerular capillary formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a glomerular capillary. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0061249	name:Name:mesonephric glomerular capillary formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a mesonephric glomerular capillary. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0072277	name:Name:metanephric glomerular capillary formation	info:Definition:The process that gives rise to a metanephric glomerular capillary. This process pertains to the initial formation of a structure from unspecified parts.
0072129	name:Name:renal capsule formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a renal capsule from unspecified parts. The renal capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the kidney, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage. During development, it comprises a single layer of flattened cells that lie just above the cortical stroma and the condensed mesenchyme of the nephrogenic zone. It is in this region that the early stages of nephron induction and formation of new generations ureteric bud branches occur, as the kidney expands.
0061287	name:Name:mesonephric capsule formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a mesonephric capsule from unspecified parts. The mesonephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the mesonephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage.
0072266	name:Name:metanephric capsule formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a metanephric capsule from unspecified parts. The metanephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the metanephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage.
0072179	name:Name:nephric duct formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a nephric duct. A nephric duct is a tube that drains a primitive kidney.
0072181	name:Name:mesonephric duct formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a mesonephric duct. A mesonephric duct is a tube drains the mesonephros.
0072187	name:Name:metanephric cap formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a metanephric cap from unspecified parts. The metanephric cap is formed by the condensation of metanephric mesenchymal cells surrounding the ureteric bud tip.
0072564	name:Name:blood microparticle formation	name:Synonym:microparticle generation	name:Synonym:microparticle release	info:Definition:The cellular component organization process in which microparticles bud off from a parent cell. A microparticle is a phospholipid microvesicle that is derived from any of several cell types, such as platelets, blood cells, endothelial cells, or others, and contains membrane receptors as well as other proteins characteristic of the parental cell.
0072565	name:Name:endothelial microparticle formation	name:Synonym:endothelial microparticle generation	name:Synonym:endothelial microparticle release	info:Definition:The cellular component organization process in which microparticles bud off from an endothelial cell.
0075025	name:Name:initiation of appressorium on or near host	name:Synonym:appressorium initiation on or near host	name:Synonym:initiation of appressorium by symbiont on or near host	name:Synonym:initiation of symbiont appressorium on or near host	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell starts to acquire specialized features of the symbiont appressorium to aid in infection of the host. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0075057	name:Name:initiation of symbiont penetration peg	name:Synonym:symbiont penetration peg initiation	info:Definition:The process in which a relatively unspecialized cell of the symbiont starts to acquire the characteristics of a mature penetration peg to penetrate into its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0090009	name:Name:primitive streak formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of the primitive streak from unspecified parts. The primitive streak is a ridge of cells running along the midline of the embryo where the mesoderm ingresses. It defines the anterior-posterior axis.
0090014	name:Name:leaflet formation	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the initial formation of a leaflet from unspecified parts. A leaflet is one of the ultimate segments of a compound leaf.
0090017	name:Name:anterior neural plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of anterior end of the flat, thickened layer of ectodermal cells known as the neural plate.
0090018	name:Name:posterior neural plate formation	info:Definition:The formation of posterior end of the flat, thickened layer of ectodermal cells known as the neural plate.
0048647	name:Name:polyphenic determination	info:Definition:The process in which individuals that have the potential to develop any of several possible distinct developmental paths have their individual developmental fates determined in response to environmental and/or genetic cues.
0048648	name:Name:caste determination	info:Definition:The process in which individuals, having the potential to develop any of several distinct developmental paths, have their individual developmental fate determined in response to environmental and/or genetic cues. Individuals with distinct developmental fates perform different functions in a colony of social insects.
0048649	name:Name:caste determination, influence by genetic factors	info:Definition:The process in which individuals, having the potential to develop any of several distinct developmental paths, have their individual developmental fate determined in response to genetic cues. Individuals with distinct developmental fates perform different functions in a colony of social insects.
0048650	name:Name:caste determination, influence by environmental factors	info:Definition:The process in which individuals, having the potential to develop any of several distinct developmental paths, have their individual developmental fate determined in response to environmental cues. Individuals with distinct developmental fates perform different functions in a colony of social insects.
0048651	name:Name:polyphenic determination, influence by environmental factors	info:Definition:The process in which individuals that have the potential to develop any of several possible distinct developmental paths have their individual developmental fates determined in response to environmental cues.
0048652	name:Name:polyphenic determination, influence by genetic factors	info:Definition:The process in which individuals that have the potential to develop any of several possible distinct developmental paths have their individual developmental fates determined in response to genetic cues.
0048856	name:Name:anatomical structure development	name:Synonym:development of an anatomical structure	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of an anatomical structure from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the structure and ends with the mature structure, whatever form that may be including its natural destruction. An anatomical structure is any biological entity that occupies space and is distinguished from its surroundings. Anatomical structures can be macroscopic such as a carpel, or microscopic such as an acrosome.
0001568	name:Name:blood vessel development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a blood vessel over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The blood vessel is the vasculature carrying blood.
0060674	name:Name:placenta blood vessel development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a blood vessel of the placenta over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0060840	name:Name:artery development	info:Definition:The progression of the artery over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. An artery is a blood vessel that carries blood away from the heart to a capillary bed.
0060841	name:Name:venous blood vessel development	info:Definition:The progression of the venous blood vessel over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. Venous blood vessels carry blood back to the heart after the capillary bed.
0060976	name:Name:coronary vasculature development	name:Synonym:cardiac blood vessel development	name:Synonym:cardiac vasculature development	name:Synonym:coronary blood vessel development	name:Synonym:heart blood vessel development	name:Synonym:heart vasculature development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the blood vessels of the heart over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0072012	name:Name:glomerulus vasculature development	name:Synonym:glomerulus capillary development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a glomerulus vasculature from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the glomerulus vasculature and ends with the mature structure. The glomerulus vasculature is composed of the tubule structures that carry blood or lymph in the glomerulus.
0001748	name:Name:optic lobe placode development	name:Synonym:optic lobe and Bolwig's organ precursor development	name:Synonym:optic placode development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the optic placode over time, from its formation to the mature structure. During embryonic stage 12 the placode starts to invaginate, forming a pouch. Cells that will form Bolwig's organ segregate from the ventral lip of this pouch, remaining in the head epidermis. The remainder of the invagination loses contact with the outer surface and becomes the optic lobe. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0001824	name:Name:blastocyst development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the blastocyst over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mammalian blastocyst is a hollow ball of cells containing two cell types, the inner cell mass and the trophectoderm.
0001893	name:Name:maternal placenta development	name:Synonym:decidua development	info:Definition:Maternally driven process whose specific outcome is the progression of the placenta over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The placenta is an organ of metabolic interchange between fetus and mother, partly of embryonic origin and partly of maternal origin.
0001945	name:Name:lymph vessel development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a lymph vessel over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0002088	name:Name:lens development in camera-type eye	name:Synonym:lens development	name:Synonym:lens development in camera-style eye	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lens over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The lens is a transparent structure in the eye through which light is focused onto the retina. An example of this process is found in Mus musculus.
0003157	name:Name:endocardium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the endocardium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The endocardium is an anatomical structure comprised of an endothelium and an extracellular matrix that forms the innermost layer of tissue of the heart, and lines the heart chambers.
0003161	name:Name:cardiac conduction system development	name:Synonym:cardiac impulse conducting system development	name:Synonym:heart conduction system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cardiac conduction system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cardiac conduction system consists of specialized cardiomyocytes that regulate the frequency of heart beat.
0003162	name:Name:atrioventricular node development	name:Synonym:AV node development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the atrioventricular (AV) node over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The AV node is part of the cardiac conduction system that controls the timing of ventricle contraction by receiving electrical signals from the sinoatrial (SA) node and relaying them to the His-Purkinje system.
0003163	name:Name:sinoatrial node development	name:Synonym:SA node development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the sinoatrial (SA) node over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The SA node is part of the cardiac conduction system that controls the timing of heart muscle contraction. It relays electrical signals to the AV node.
0003164	name:Name:His-Purkinje system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the His-Purkinje system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The His-Purkinje system receives signals from the AV node and is composed of the fibers that regulate cardiac muscle contraction in the ventricles.
0003165	name:Name:cardiac Purkinje fiber development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a cardiac Purkinje fiber over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cardiac Purkinje fiber is part of the cardiac conduction system that receives signals from the bundle of His and innervates the ventricular cardiac muscle.
0003166	name:Name:bundle of His development	name:Synonym:atrioventricular bundle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the bundle of His over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The bundle of His is part of the His-Purkinje system that transmits signals from the AV node to the cardiac Purkinje fibers.
0003170	name:Name:heart valve development	name:Synonym:cardiac valve development	info:Definition:The progression of a heart valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A heart valve is a structure that restricts the flow of blood to different regions of the heart and forms from an endocardial cushion.
0003171	name:Name:atrioventricular valve development	name:Synonym:AV valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the atrioventricular valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003172	name:Name:sinoatrial valve development	name:Synonym:SA valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the sinoatrial valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003173	name:Name:ventriculo bulbo valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the ventriculo bulbo valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003174	name:Name:mitral valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the mitral valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003175	name:Name:tricuspid valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the tricuspid valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003176	name:Name:aortic valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the aortic valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003177	name:Name:pulmonary valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the pulmonary valve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003178	name:Name:coronary sinus valve development	info:Definition:The progression of the valve of the coronary sinus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0003204	name:Name:cardiac skeleton development	name:Synonym:heart fibrous skeleton development	info:Definition:The progression of the cardiac skeleton over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cardiac skeleton is a specialized extracellular matrix that separates the atria from the ventricles and provides physical support for the heart.
0003205	name:Name:cardiac chamber development	info:Definition:The progression of a cardiac chamber over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A cardiac chamber is an enclosed cavity within the heart.
0003230	name:Name:cardiac atrium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a cardiac atrium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A cardiac atrium receives blood from a vein and pumps it to a cardiac ventricle.
0003231	name:Name:cardiac ventricle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a cardiac ventricle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A cardiac ventricle receives blood from a cardiac atrium and pumps it out of the heart.
0003232	name:Name:bulbus arteriosus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the bulbus arteriosus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The bulbus arteriosus is an elastic heart chamber.
0003235	name:Name:sinus venosus development	info:Definition:The progression of the sinus venosus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The sinus venosus is a heart chamber attached to the atrium on the venous side of the embryonic heart.
0003238	name:Name:conus arteriosus development	info:Definition:The progression of the conus arteriosus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The conus arteriosus is a valved chamber with thick muscular walls stemming from the ventricle and connecting to the pulmonary trunk.
0003279	name:Name:cardiac septum development	name:Synonym:heart septum development	info:Definition:The progression of a cardiac septum over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0003281	name:Name:ventricular septum development	name:Synonym:interventricular septum development	name:Synonym:septum inferius development	info:Definition:The progression of the ventricular septum over time from its formation to the mature structure.
0003283	name:Name:atrial septum development	info:Definition:The progression of the atrial septum over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0003360	name:Name:brainstem development	info:Definition:The progression of the brainstem from its formation to the mature structure. The brainstem is the part of the brain that connects the brain with the spinal cord.
0003407	name:Name:neural retina development	info:Definition:The progression of the neural retina over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. The neural retina is the part of the retina that contains neurons and photoreceptor cells.
0003410	name:Name:anterior rotation of the optic cup	info:Definition:A 90 degree-rotation of the optic cup resulting in its alignment with the anterior-posterior body axis.
0007378	name:Name:amnioserosa formation	info:Definition:Formation of the amnioserosa, an epithelium that occupies a hole in the embryonic dorsal epidermis. This occurs by the transformation of a narrow strip of cells at the dorsal midline of the blastoderm from columnar to squamous cells, accompanied by a lateral shift.
0007418	name:Name:ventral midline development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ventral midline over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In protostomes (such as insects, snails and worms) as well as deuterostomes (vertebrates), the midline is an embryonic region that functions in patterning of the adjacent nervous tissue. The ventral midline in insects is a cell population extending along the ventral surface of the embryo and is the region from which cells detach to form the ventrally located nerve cords. In vertebrates, the midline is originally located dorsally. During development, it folds inwards and becomes the ventral part of the dorsally located neural tube and is then called the ventral midline, or floor plate.
0007458	name:Name:progression of morphogenetic furrow involved in compound eye morphogenesis	name:Synonym:progression of morphogenetic furrow during compound eye morphogenesis	info:Definition:The morphogenetic furrow is a dorsoventral indentation which sweeps anteriorly across the eye disc. Ommatidia begin to form along the furrow, resulting in a graded series of ommatidial development across the anterior/posterior axis of the disc.
0007477	name:Name:notum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dorsal part of the body over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007487	name:Name:analia development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the analia over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The analia is the posterior-most vertral appendage that develops from the genital disc. An example of this process is analia development in Drosophila melanogaster.
0045496	name:Name:male analia development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the analia of the male over time, from formation to the mature structure. The analia is the posterior-most vertral appendage that develops from the genital disc. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0045497	name:Name:female analia development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the analia of the female over time, from formation to the mature structure. The analia is the posterior-most vertral appendage that develops from the genital disc. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0007496	name:Name:anterior midgut development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anterior midgut over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007497	name:Name:posterior midgut development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the posterior midgut over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0008056	name:Name:ocellus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ocellus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ocellus is a simple visual organ of insects.
0009888	name:Name:tissue development	name:Synonym:histogenesis	name:Synonym:histogenesis and organogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a tissue over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007398	name:Name:ectoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ectoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In animal embryos, the ectoderm is the outer germ layer of the embryo, formed during gastrulation.
0007492	name:Name:endoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the endoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The endoderm is the innermost germ layer that develops into the gastrointestinal tract, the lungs and associated tissues.
0007498	name:Name:mesoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mesoderm is the middle germ layer that develops into muscle, bone, cartilage, blood and connective tissue.
0007502	name:Name:digestive tract mesoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the digestive tract mesoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The digestive tract mesoderm is portion of the middle layer of the three primary germ layers of the embryo which will go on to form part of the digestive tract of the organism.
0008544	name:Name:epidermis development	name:Synonym:hypodermis development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the epidermis over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The epidermis is the outer epithelial layer of a plant or animal, it may be a single layer that produces an extracellular material (e.g. the cuticle of arthropods) or a complex stratified squamous epithelium, as in the case of many vertebrate species.
0010087	name:Name:phloem or xylem histogenesis	name:Synonym:phloem or xylem histogenesis	name:Synonym:vascular tissue development	name:Synonym:vascular tissue histogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of phloem and/or xylem over time, from formation to the mature structure. An example of this process is found in Arabidopsis thaliana.
0010479	name:Name:stele development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stele over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The stele is the central column of primary vascular tissue in the root and any tissue that it surrounds.
0031214	name:Name:biomineral tissue development	name:Synonym:biomineral formation	name:Synonym:biomineralization	name:Synonym:mineralization	info:Definition:Formation of hard tissues that consist mainly of inorganic compounds, and also contain a small amounts of organic matrices that are believed to play important roles in their formation.
0048507	name:Name:meristem development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the meristem over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0051216	name:Name:cartilage development	name:Synonym:cartilage biogenesis	name:Synonym:cartilage biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cartilage formation	name:Synonym:chondrogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cartilage over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Cartilage is a connective tissue dominated by extracellular matrix containing collagen type II and large amounts of proteoglycan, particularly chondroitin sulfate.
0060427	name:Name:lung connective tissue development	name:Synonym:pulmonary connective tissue development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of lung connective tissue from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of lung connective tissue and ends with the mature structure. The lung connective tissue is a material made up of fibers forming a framework and support structure for the lungs.
0060429	name:Name:epithelium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an epithelium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An epithelium is a tissue that covers the internal or external surfaces of an anatomical structure.
0060485	name:Name:mesenchyme development	name:Synonym:mesenchymal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a mesenchymal tissue over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A mesenchymal tissue is made up of loosely packed stellate cells.
0060537	name:Name:muscle tissue development	info:Definition:The progression of muscle tissue over time, from its initial formation to its mature state. Muscle tissue is a contractile tissue made up of actin and myosin fibers.
0060612	name:Name:adipose tissue development	name:Synonym:adipogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of adipose tissue over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Adipose tissue is specialized tissue that is used to store fat.
0080125	name:Name:multicellular structure septum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the multicellular structure septum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The multicellular structure septum is the thin partition or membrane that divides a cavity or a mass of tissue.
0090008	name:Name:hypoblast development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hypoblast over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The hypoblast is a tissue formed from the inner cell mass that lies beneath the epiblast and gives rise to extraembryonic endoderm.
0010098	name:Name:suspensor development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the suspensor over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The suspensor is the extension at the base of the embryo that anchors the embryo in the embryo sac and pushes it into the endosperm.
0010865	name:Name:stipule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stipule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A stipule is one of (usually) a pair of appendages at the bases of leaves in many broad-leaved angiosperms.
0016319	name:Name:mushroom body development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mushroom body over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mushroom body is composed of the prominent neuropil structures of the insect central brain, thought to be crucial for olfactory associated learning. These consist mainly of a bulbous calyx and tightly packaged arrays of thin parallel fibers of the Kenyon cells.
0016358	name:Name:dendrite development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dendrite over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A dendrite is a freely branching protoplasmic process of a nerve cell.
0003390	name:Name:dendrite development by retrograde extension	name:Synonym:dendrite retrograde extension	info:Definition:The progression of a dendrite over time by the attachment of a part of the neuron to an anchor and the subsequent migration of the cell body away from the anchor point.
0021510	name:Name:spinal cord development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the spinal cord over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The spinal cord primarily conducts sensory and motor nerve impulses between the brain and the peripheral nervous tissues.
0021516	name:Name:dorsal spinal cord development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dorsal region of the spinal cord over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The dorsal region of the mature spinal cord contains neurons that process and relay sensory input.
0021517	name:Name:ventral spinal cord development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ventral region of the spinal cord over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The neurons of the ventral region of the mature spinal cord participate in motor output.
0021536	name:Name:diencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the diencephalon over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The diencephalon is the paired caudal parts of the prosencephalon from which the thalamus, hypothalamus, epithalamus and subthalamus are derived; these regions regulate autonomic, visceral and endocrine function, and process information directed to the cerebral cortex.
0021537	name:Name:telencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the telencephalon over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The telencephalon is the paired anteriolateral division of the prosencephalon plus the lamina terminalis from which the olfactory lobes, cerebral cortex, and subcortical nuclei are derived.
0021538	name:Name:epithalamus development	info:Definition:The progression of the epithalamus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The epithalamus is the small dorsomedial area of the thalamus including the habenular nuclei and associated fiber bundles, the pineal body, and the epithelial roof of the third ventricle.
0021539	name:Name:subthalamus development	name:Synonym:ventral thalamus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the subthalamus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The subthalamus is the anterior part of the diencephalon that lies between the thalamus, hypothalamus, and tegmentum of the mesencephalon, including subthalamic nucleus, zona incerta, the fields of Forel, and the nucleus of ansa lenticularis.
0021541	name:Name:ammon gyrus development	name:Synonym:Ammon's horn development	name:Synonym:cornu ammonis development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ammon gyrus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ammon gyrus, often subdivided into the CA1 and CA3 regions, is one of the two interlocking gyri of the hippocampus that is rich in large pyramidal neurons.
0021542	name:Name:dentate gyrus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dentate gyrus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The dentate gyrus is one of two interlocking gyri of the hippocampus. It contains granule cells, which project to the pyramidal cells and interneurons of the CA3 region of the ammon gyrus.
0021543	name:Name:pallium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pallium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pallium is the roof region of the telencephalon.
0021544	name:Name:subpallium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the subpallium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The subpallium is the base region of the telencephalon.
0021546	name:Name:rhombomere development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the rhombomere over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates.
0021567	name:Name:rhombomere 1 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 1 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021568	name:Name:rhombomere 2 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 2 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021569	name:Name:rhombomere 3 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 3 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021570	name:Name:rhombomere 4 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 4 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021571	name:Name:rhombomere 5 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 5 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021572	name:Name:rhombomere 6 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 6 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021573	name:Name:rhombomere 7 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 7 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021574	name:Name:rhombomere 8 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of rhombomere 8 over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Rhombomeres are transverse segments of the developing rhombencephalon. Rhombomeres are lineage restricted, express different genes from one another, and adopt different developmental fates. Rhombomeres are numbered in anterior to posterior order.
0021548	name:Name:pons development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pons over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pons lies above the medulla and next to the cerebellum. The pons conveys information about movement from the cerebral hemisphere to the cerebellum.
0021549	name:Name:cerebellum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cerebellum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cerebellum is the portion of the brain in the back of the head between the cerebrum and the pons. In mice, the cerebellum controls balance for walking and standing, modulates the force and range of movement and is involved in the learning of motor skills.
0021550	name:Name:medulla oblongata development	name:Synonym:medulla development	name:Synonym:myelencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the medulla oblongata over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The medulla oblongata lies directly above the spinal cord and controls vital autonomic functions such as digestion, breathing and the control of heart rate.
0021592	name:Name:fourth ventricle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fourth ventricle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The fourth ventricle is an irregularly shaped cavity in the rhombencephalon, between the medulla oblongata, the pons, and the isthmus in front, and the cerebellum behind. It is continuous with the central canal of the cord below and with the cerebral aqueduct above, and through its lateral and median apertures it communicates with the subarachnoid space.
0021670	name:Name:lateral ventricle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lateral ventricles over time, from the formation to the mature structure. The two lateral ventricles are a cavity in each of the cerebral hemispheres derived from the cavity of the embryonic neural tube. They are separated from each other by the septum pellucidum, and each communicates with the third ventricle by the foramen of Monro, through which also the choroid plexuses of the lateral ventricles become continuous with that of the third ventricle.
0021675	name:Name:nerve development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nerve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021545	name:Name:cranial nerve development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cranial nerves over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cranial nerves are composed of twelve pairs of nerves that emanate from the nervous tissue of the hindbrain. These nerves are sensory, motor, or mixed in nature, and provide the motor and general sensory innervation of the head, neck and viscera. They mediate vision, hearing, olfaction and taste and carry the parasympathetic innervation of the autonomic ganglia that control visceral functions.
0021678	name:Name:third ventricle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the third ventricle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The third ventricle is the narrow cleft inferior to the corpus callosum, within the diencephalon, between the paired thalami. Its floor is formed by the hypothalamus, its anterior wall by the lamina terminalis, and its roof by ependyma, and it communicates with the fourth ventricle by the cerebral aqueduct, and with the lateral ventricles by the interventricular foramina.
0021679	name:Name:cerebellar molecular layer development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cerebellar molecular layer nerve over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The molecular layer is the outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the parallel fibers of the granule cells, interneurons such as stellate and basket cells, and the dendrites of the underlying Purkinje cells.
0021680	name:Name:cerebellar Purkinje cell layer development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The Purkinje cell layer lies just underneath the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. It contains the neuronal cell bodies of the Purkinje cells that are arranged side by side in a single layer. Candelabrum interneurons are vertically oriented between the Purkinje cells. Purkinje neurons are inhibitory and provide the output of the cerebellar cortex through axons that project into the white matter. Extensive dendritic trees from the Purkinje cells extend upward in a single plane into the molecular layer where they synapse with parallel fibers of granule cells.
0021681	name:Name:cerebellar granular layer development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cerebellar granule layer over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The granular layer is the innermost layer of the cerebellar cortex. This layer contains densely packed small neurons, mostly granule cells. Some Golgi cells are found at the outer border. Granule neurons send parallel fibers to the upper molecular layer, where they synapse with Purkinje cell dendrites. Mossy fibers from the pontine nuclei in the white matter synapse with granule cell axons, Golgi cell axons and unipolar brush interneuron axons at cerebellar glomeruli in the granule cell layer.
0021695	name:Name:cerebellar cortex development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cerebellar cortex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cerebellar cortex is a thin mantle of gray matter that covers the surface of each cerebral hemisphere. It has a characteristic morphology with convolutions (gyri) and crevices (sulci) that have specific functions. Six layers of nerve cells and the nerve pathways that connect them comprise the cerebellar cortex. Together, these regions are responsible for the processes of conscious thought, perception, emotion and memory as well as advanced motor function.
0021703	name:Name:locus ceruleus development	name:Synonym:locus caeruleus development	name:Synonym:locus coeruleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the locus ceruleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The locus ceruleus is a dense cluster of neurons within the dorsorostral pons. This nucleus is the major location of neurons that release norepinephrine throughout the brain, and is responsible for physiological responses to stress and panic.
0021723	name:Name:rhombencephalic reticular formation development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the reticular formation over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The reticular formation is a series of brain nuclei located in the medulla oblongata.
0021727	name:Name:intermediate reticular formation development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the intermediate reticular formation over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021728	name:Name:inferior reticular formation development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inferior reticular formation over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021729	name:Name:superior reticular formation development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior reticular formation over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021735	name:Name:dentate nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dentate nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021756	name:Name:striatum development	name:Synonym:neostriatum development	name:Synonym:striate nucleus development	info:Definition:The progression of the striatum over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The striatum is a region of the forebrain consisting of the caudate nucleus, putamen and fundus striati.
0021758	name:Name:putamen development	info:Definition:The progression of the putamen over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The putamen is the lens-shaped basal ganglion involved with control of voluntary movement in the brain.
0021759	name:Name:globus pallidus development	name:Synonym:pallidum development	info:Definition:The progression of the globus pallidus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The globus pallidus is one of the basal ganglia involved with control of voluntary movement in the brain.
0021762	name:Name:substantia nigra development	info:Definition:The progression of the substantia nigra over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The substantia nigra is the layer of gray substance that separates the posterior parts of the cerebral peduncles (tegmentum mesencephali) from the anterior parts; it normally includes a posterior compact part with many pigmented cells (pars compacta) and an anterior reticular part whose cells contain little pigment (pars reticularis).
0021764	name:Name:amygdala development	info:Definition:The progression of the amygdala over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The amygdala is an almond-shaped set of neurons in the medial temporal lobe of the brain that play a key role in processing emotions such as fear and pleasure.
0021765	name:Name:cingulate gyrus development	info:Definition:The progression of the cingulate gyrus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The cingulate gyrus is a ridge in the cerebral cortex located dorsal to the corpus callosum.
0021766	name:Name:hippocampus development	info:Definition:The progression of the hippocampus over time from its initial formation until its mature state.
0021767	name:Name:mammillary body development	name:Synonym:mammillary body development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammillary body over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The mammillary body is a protrusion at the posterior end of the hypothalamus that contains hypothalamic nuclei.
0021769	name:Name:orbitofrontal cortex development	info:Definition:The progression of the orbitofrontal cortex over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The orbitofrontal cortex is a cerebral cortex region located in the frontal lobe.
0021770	name:Name:parahippocampal gyrus development	name:Synonym:hippocampal gyrus development	info:Definition:The progression of the parahippocampal gyrus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The parahippocampal gyrus is a ridge in the cerebral cortex.
0021772	name:Name:olfactory bulb development	info:Definition:The progression of the olfactory bulb over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The olfactory bulb coordinates neuronal signaling involved in the perception of smell. It receives input from the sensory neurons and outputs to the olfactory cortex.
0021794	name:Name:thalamus development	info:Definition:The process in which the thalamus changes over time, from its initial formation to its mature state.
0021854	name:Name:hypothalamus development	info:Definition:The progression of the hypothalamus region of the forebrain, from its initial formation to its mature state.
0021905	name:Name:forebrain-midbrain boundary formation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the creation of the forebrain-midbrain boundary.
0021915	name:Name:neural tube development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the neural tube over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mature structure of the neural tube exists when the tube has been segmented into the forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord regions. In addition neural crest has budded away from the epithelium.
0021984	name:Name:adenohypophysis development	name:Synonym:adenophysis development	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary development	name:Synonym:anterior pituitary gland development	info:Definition:The progression of the adenohypophysis over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The adenohypophysis is the anterior part of the pituitary. It secretes a variety of hormones and its function is regulated by the hypothalamus.
0021985	name:Name:neurohypophysis development	name:Synonym:neurophysis development	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary development	name:Synonym:posterior pituitary gland development	info:Definition:The progression of the neurohypophysis over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The neurohypophysis is the part of the pituitary gland that secretes hormones involved in blood pressure regulation.
0021986	name:Name:habenula development	info:Definition:The progression of the habenula over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The habenula is the group of nuclei that makes up the stalk of the pineal gland.
0021987	name:Name:cerebral cortex development	name:Synonym:neocortex development	info:Definition:The progression of the cerebral cortex over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The cerebral cortex is the outer layered region of the telencephalon.
0021988	name:Name:olfactory lobe development	info:Definition:The progression of the olfactory lobe over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The olfactory lobe is the area of the brain that process the neural inputs for the sense of smell.
0021989	name:Name:olfactory cortex development	info:Definition:The progression of the olfactory cortex over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The olfactory cortex is involved in the perception of smell. It receives input from the olfactory bulb and is responsible for the identification of odors.
0022037	name:Name:metencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metencephalon over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0022038	name:Name:corpus callosum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the corpus callosum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The corpus callosum is a thick bundle of nerve fibers comprising a commissural plate connecting the two cerebral hemispheres. It consists of contralateral axon projections that provide communication between the right and left cerebral hemispheres.
0030900	name:Name:forebrain development	name:Synonym:prosencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the forebrain over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The forebrain is the anterior of the three primary divisions of the developing chordate brain or the corresponding part of the adult brain (in vertebrates, includes especially the cerebral hemispheres, the thalamus, and the hypothalamus and especially in higher vertebrates is the main control center for sensory and associative information processing, visceral functions, and voluntary motor functions).
0030901	name:Name:midbrain development	name:Synonym:mesencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the midbrain over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The midbrain is the middle division of the three primary divisions of the developing chordate brain or the corresponding part of the adult brain (in vertebrates, includes a ventral part containing the cerebral peduncles and a dorsal tectum containing the corpora quadrigemina and that surrounds the aqueduct of Sylvius connecting the third and fourth ventricles).
0030902	name:Name:hindbrain development	name:Synonym:rhombencephalon development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hindbrain over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The hindbrain is the posterior of the three primary divisions of the developing chordate brain, or the corresponding part of the adult brain (in vertebrates, includes the cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata and controls the autonomic functions and equilibrium).
0030917	name:Name:midbrain-hindbrain boundary development	name:Synonym:isthmic organizer development	name:Synonym:isthmomesencephalic boundary development	name:Synonym:isthmus development	name:Synonym:MHB development	name:Synonym:midbrain-hindbrain orgainizer development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The midbrain-hindbrain domain of the embryonic brain is comprised of the mesencephalic vesicle and the first rhombencephalic vesicle at early somitogenesis stages.
0031017	name:Name:exocrine pancreas development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the exocrine pancreas over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The exocrine pancreas produces and store zymogens of digestive enzymes, such as chymotrypsinogen and trypsinogen in the acinar cells.
0031018	name:Name:endocrine pancreas development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the endocrine pancreas over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The endocrine pancreas is made up of islet cells that produce insulin, glucagon and somatostatin.
0032835	name:Name:glomerulus development	name:Synonym:glomerular development	info:Definition:The progression of the glomerulus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The glomerulus is a capillary tuft which forms a close network with the visceral epithelium (podocytes) and the mesangium to form the filtration barrier and is surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the vertebrate kidney. The glomerulus is part of the nephron and is restricted to one body segment.
0039021	name:Name:pronephric glomerulus development	info:Definition:The progression of the glomerulus of the pronephric kidney over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The pronephric glomerulus is part of the pronephric nephron and is restricted to one body segment.
0061224	name:Name:mesonephric glomerulus development	info:Definition:The progression of the mesonephric glomerulus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The mesonephric glomerulus is a capillary tuft which forms a close network with the visceral epithelium (podocytes) and the mesangium to form the filtration barrier and is surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the mature vertebrate kidney, or mesonephros.
0072224	name:Name:metanephric glomerulus development	name:Synonym:metanephric glomerular development	info:Definition:The progression of the metanephric glomerulus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The metanephric glomerulus is a capillary tuft which forms a close network with the visceral epithelium (podocytes) and the mesangium to form the filtration barrier and is surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the mature vertebrate kidney, or metanephros.
0033504	name:Name:floor plate development	info:Definition:The progression of the floor plate over time from its initial formation until its mature state.
0035295	name:Name:tube development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a tube over time, from its initial formation to a mature structure. Epithelial and endothelial tubes transport gases, liquids and cells from one site to another and form the basic structure of many organs and tissues including lung and trachea, kidney, the mammary gland, the vascular system and the gastrointestinal and urinary-genital tracts.
0001657	name:Name:ureteric bud development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ureteric bud over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0030323	name:Name:respiratory tube development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the respiratory tube over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The respiratory tube is assumed to mean any tube in the respiratory tract.
0035050	name:Name:embryonic heart tube development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the embryonic heart tube over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The heart tube forms as the heart rudiment from the heart field.
0035502	name:Name:metanephric ureteric bud development	info:Definition:The development of the portion of the ureteric bud tube that contributes to the morphogenesis of the metanephros.
0035503	name:Name:ureter ureteric bud development	info:Definition:The development of the portion of the ureteric bud that contributes to the morphogenesis of the ureter. The ureter ureteric bud is the initial structure that forms the ureter.
0061071	name:Name:urethra epithelium development	info:Definition:The progression of the urethra epithelium over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. The urethra is a renal system organ that carries urine from the bladder to outside the body. The epithelium is the tubular, planar layer of cells through which the urine passes.
0061326	name:Name:renal tubule development	info:Definition:The progression of the renal tubule over time from its formation to the mature form. A renal tubule is a tube that filters, re-absorbs and secretes substances to rid an organism of waste and to play a role in fluid homeostasis.
0072164	name:Name:mesonephric tubule development	info:Definition:The progression of a mesonephric tubule over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. A mesonephric tubule is an epithelial tube that is part of the mesonephros.
0072170	name:Name:metanephric tubule development	info:Definition:The progression of a metanephric tubule over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. A metanephric tubule is an epithelial tube that is part of the metanephros.
0072176	name:Name:nephric duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nephric duct over time, from its initial formation to a mature structure. A nephric duct is a tube that drains a primitive kidney.
0035622	name:Name:intrahepatic bile duct development	name:Synonym:IHBD development	name:Synonym:intrahepatic biliary duct development	info:Definition:The progression of the intrahepatic bile ducts over time, from their formation to the mature structure. Intrahepatic bile ducts (bile ducts within the liver) collect bile from bile canaliculi in the liver, and connect to the extrahepatic bile ducts (bile ducts outside the liver).
0035628	name:Name:cystic duct development	info:Definition:The progression of the cystic duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cystic duct runs from the gall bladder to the common bile duct.
0035801	name:Name:adrenal cortex development	name:Synonym:adrenal gland cortex development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the adrenal cortex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The adrenal cortex is located at the periphery of the adrenal gland and controls glucose and electrolyte metabolism, response to stress and sexual development through the production of different classes of steroid hormones (glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids and androgens).
0035844	name:Name:cloaca development	name:Synonym:cloacal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cloaca over time, from it's formation to the mature structure. The cloaca is the common chamber into which intestinal, genital and urinary canals open in vertebrates.
0035878	name:Name:nail development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nail over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A nail is a horn-like envelope covering the outer end of a finger or toe, and consists of the nail plate, the nail matrix and the nail bed below it, and the grooves surrounding it.
0035905	name:Name:ascending aorta development	info:Definition:The progression of the ascending aorta over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The ascending aorta is the portion of the aorta in a two-pass circulatory system that lies between the heart and the arch of aorta. In a two-pass circulatory system blood passes twice through the heart to supply the body once.
0035906	name:Name:descending aorta development	info:Definition:The progression of the descending aorta over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The descending aorta is the portion of the aorta in a two-pass circulatory system from the arch of aorta to the point where it divides into the common iliac arteries. In a two-pass circulatory system blood passes twice through the heart to supply the body once.
0039009	name:Name:rectal diverticulum development	name:Synonym:pronephric rectal diverticulum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the rectal diverticulum over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The rectal diverticulum is an outgrowth of the cloaca and links the pronephric kidney to the exterior.
0039012	name:Name:pronephric sinus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pronephric sinus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pronephric sinus is an ill-defined capillary network that lies between the pronephric tubules.
0039018	name:Name:nephrostome development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the nephrostome over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The nephrostome is the opening of the pronephros into the body cavity.
0042335	name:Name:cuticle development	name:Synonym:cuticle anabolism	name:Synonym:cuticle biosynthesis	name:Synonym:cuticle biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:cuticle formation	name:Synonym:cuticle synthesis	info:Definition:The chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of a cuticle, the outer layer of some animals and plants, which acts to prevent water loss.
0007592	name:Name:protein-based cuticle development	name:Synonym:protein-based cuticle anabolism	name:Synonym:protein-based cuticle biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:protein-based cuticle formation	name:Synonym:protein-based cuticle synthesis	info:Definition:Synthesis and deposition of a protein-based noncellular, hardened, or membranous secretion from an epithelial sheet. An example of this is found in Caenorhabditis elegans.
0040003	name:Name:chitin-based cuticle development	name:Synonym:chitin-based cuticle anabolism	name:Synonym:chitin-based cuticle biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:chitin-based cuticle formation	name:Synonym:chitin-based cuticle synthesis	info:Definition:Synthesis and deposition of a chitin-based noncellular, hardened, or membranous secretion from an epithelial sheet. An example of this process is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0043581	name:Name:mycelium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mycelium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A mycelium is the mass of hyphae that constitutes the vegetative part of a fungus.
0048036	name:Name:central complex development	name:Synonym:central body development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the central complex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The central complex region of the insect brain is thought to be crucial for control of locomotive behavior. Located in the middle of the two protocerebral hemispheres, it comprises four neuropilar regions, the fan-shaped body, the ellipsoid body, the protocerebral bridge and the paired noduli.
0048058	name:Name:compound eye corneal lens development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the corneal lens in the compound eye over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The corneal lens is a chitinous extracellular secretion of the four underlying cone cells and the pigment cells.
0048098	name:Name:antennal joint development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the antennal joint over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The antennal joint is the joint between antennal segments.
0048286	name:Name:lung alveolus development	name:Synonym:alveolarization	name:Synonym:alveologenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the alveolus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The alveolus is a sac for holding air in the lungs; formed by the terminal dilation of air passageways.
0048382	name:Name:mesendoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesendoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In animal embryos, mesendoderm development gives rise to both mesoderm and endoderm tissues.
0048383	name:Name:mesectoderm development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesectoderm over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In animal embryos, mesectoderm development processes give rise to both mesoderm and ectoderm tissues.
0048513	name:Name:organ development	name:Synonym:development of an organ	name:Synonym:organogenesis	info:Definition:Development of a tissue or tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Development pertains to the process whose specific outcome is the progression of a structure over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0001822	name:Name:kidney development	name:Synonym:nephrogenesis	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the kidney over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The kidney is an organ that filters the blood and/or excretes the end products of body metabolism in the form of urine.
0001889	name:Name:liver development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the liver over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The liver is an exocrine gland which secretes bile and functions in metabolism of protein and carbohydrate and fat, synthesizes substances involved in the clotting of the blood, synthesizes vitamin A, detoxifies poisonous substances, stores glycogen, and breaks down worn-out erythrocytes.
0001890	name:Name:placenta development	name:Synonym:placental development	name:Synonym:placentation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the placenta over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The placenta is an organ of metabolic interchange between fetus and mother, partly of embryonic origin and partly of maternal origin.
0007419	name:Name:ventral cord development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ventral cord over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ventral cord is one of the distinguishing traits of the central nervous system of all arthropods (such as insects, crustaceans and arachnids) as well as many other invertebrates, such as the annelid worms.
0007420	name:Name:brain development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the brain over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Brain development begins with patterning events in the neural tube and ends with the mature structure that is the center of thought and emotion. The brain is responsible for the coordination and control of bodily activities and the interpretation of information from the senses (sight, hearing, smell, etc.).
0007423	name:Name:sensory organ development	name:Synonym:sense organ development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of sensory organs over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007444	name:Name:imaginal disc development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the imaginal disc over time, from its formation to the metamorphosis to form adult structures. Imaginal discs are epithelial infoldings in the larvae of holometabolous insects that develop into adult structures (legs, antennae, wings, etc.).
0007503	name:Name:fat body development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fat body over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A fat body is an insect gland dorsal to the insect gut, with a function analogous to that of the vertebrate liver. It is a storage organ for fats, glycogen and protein and is a major site of intermediary metabolism.
0007507	name:Name:heart development	name:Synonym:cardiac development	name:Synonym:dorsal vessel development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the heart over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The heart is a hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood.
0007517	name:Name:muscle organ development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the muscle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The muscle is an organ consisting of a tissue made up of various elongated cells that are specialized to contract and thus to produce movement and mechanical work.
0030324	name:Name:lung development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lung over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In all air-breathing vertebrates the lungs are developed from the ventral wall of the oesophagus as a pouch which divides into two sacs. In amphibians and many reptiles the lungs retain very nearly this primitive sac-like character, but in the higher forms the connection with the esophagus becomes elongated into the windpipe and the inner walls of the sacs become more and more divided, until, in the mammals, the air spaces become minutely divided into tubes ending in small air cells, in the walls of which the blood circulates in a fine network of capillaries. In mammals the lungs are more or less divided into lobes, and each lung occupies a separate cavity in the thorax.
0031016	name:Name:pancreas development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pancreas over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pancreas is an endoderm derived structure that produces precursors of digestive enzymes and blood glucose regulating enzymes.
0048364	name:Name:root development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the root over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The root is the water- and mineral-absorbing part of a plant which is usually underground, does not bear leaves, tends to grow downwards and is typically derived from the radicle of the embryo.
0048367	name:Name:shoot development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the shoot over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048534	name:Name:hemopoietic or lymphoid organ development	name:Synonym:haematopoietic or lymphoid organ development	name:Synonym:haemopoietic or lymphoid organ development	name:Synonym:hematopoietic or lymphoid organ development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of any organ involved in hemopoiesis or lymphoid cell activation over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Such development includes differentiation of resident cell types (stromal cells) and of migratory cell types dependent on the unique microenvironment afforded by the organ for their proper differentiation.
0048568	name:Name:embryonic organ development	name:Synonym:embryonic organogenesis	info:Definition:Development, taking place during the embryonic phase, of a tissue or tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Development pertains to the process whose specific outcome is the progression of a structure over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0048569	name:Name:post-embryonic organ development	name:Synonym:post-embryonic organogenesis	info:Definition:Development, taking place during the post-embryonic phase, of a tissue or tissues that work together to perform a specific function or functions. Development pertains to the process whose specific outcome is the progression of a structure over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that work together to perform a specific function or functions.
0048728	name:Name:proboscis development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the proboscis over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048732	name:Name:gland development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a gland over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A gland is an organ specialised for secretion.
0048794	name:Name:swim bladder development	name:Synonym:gas bladder development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the swim bladder over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The swim bladder is used by some fishes to maintain buoyancy and may function in addition as a sound producing organ, a sound receptor, and a respiratory organ.
0060157	name:Name:urinary bladder development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the urinary bladder over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The urinary bladder is an elastic, muscular sac situated in the anterior part of the pelvic cavity in which urine collects before excretion.
0060433	name:Name:bronchus development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a bronchus from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the bronchus and ends with the mature structure. The bronchus is the portion of the airway that connects to the lungs.
0060438	name:Name:trachea development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a trachea over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The trachea is the portion of the airway that attaches to the bronchi as it branches.
0061010	name:Name:gall bladder development	info:Definition:The progression of the gall bladder over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The gall bladder is a cavitated organ that stores bile.
0061068	name:Name:urethra development	info:Definition:The progression of the urethra over time from its initial formation to the mature structure. The urethra is a renal system organ that carries urine from the bladder to outside the body.
0072002	name:Name:Malpighian tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the Malpighian tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A Malpighian tubule is a fine, thin-walled excretory tubule in insects which leads into the posterior part of the gut.
0072189	name:Name:ureter development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ureter over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ureter is a muscular tube that transports urine from the kidney to the urinary bladder or from the Malpighian tubule to the hindgut.
0048565	name:Name:digestive tract development	name:Synonym:gut development	name:Synonym:intestinal development	name:Synonym:intestine development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the digestive tract over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The digestive tract is the anatomical structure through which food passes and is processed.
0007494	name:Name:midgut development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the midgut over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The midgut is the middle part of the alimentary canal from the stomach, or entrance of the bile duct, to, or including, the large intestine.
0048566	name:Name:embryonic digestive tract development	name:Synonym:embryonic digestive tract development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the gut over time, from its formation to the mature structure during embryonic development. The gut is the region of the digestive tract extending from the beginning of the intestines to the anus.
0048722	name:Name:anterior cibarial plate development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anterior cibarial plate over time, from their formation to the mature structure.
0048723	name:Name:clypeus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the clypeus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The clypeus is the shield-shaped plate on an insect's head.
0048724	name:Name:epistomal sclerite development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the epistomal sclerite over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048726	name:Name:labrum development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the labrum over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048727	name:Name:posterior cibarial plate development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the posterior cibarial plate over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048731	name:Name:system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an organismal system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A system is a regularly interacting or interdependent group of organs or tissues that work together to carry out a given biological process.
0001501	name:Name:skeletal system development	name:Synonym:skeletal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the skeleton over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The skeleton is the bony framework of the body in vertebrates (endoskeleton) or the hard outer envelope of insects (exoskeleton or dermoskeleton).
0001655	name:Name:urogenital system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the urogenital system over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0001944	name:Name:vasculature development	name:Synonym:vascular system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the vasculature over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The vasculature is an interconnected tubular multi-tissue structure that contains fluid that is actively transported around the organism.
0007399	name:Name:nervous system development	name:Synonym:pan-neural process	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of nervous tissue over time, from its formation to its mature state.
0007417	name:Name:central nervous system development	name:Synonym:CNS development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the central nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The central nervous system is the core nervous system that serves an integrating and coordinating function. In vertebrates it consists of the brain, spinal cord and spinal nerves. In those invertebrates with a central nervous system it typically consists of a brain, cerebral ganglia and a nerve cord.
0007421	name:Name:stomatogastric nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the stomatogastric nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007422	name:Name:peripheral nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the peripheral nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The peripheral nervous system is one of the two major divisions of the nervous system. Nerves in the PNS connect the central nervous system (CNS) with sensory organs, other organs, muscles, blood vessels and glands.
0021591	name:Name:ventricular system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the brain ventricular system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The brain ventricular system consists of four communicating cavities within the brain that are continuous with the central canal of the spinal cord. These cavities include two lateral ventricles, the third ventricle and the fourth ventricle. Cerebrospinal fluid fills the ventricles and is produced by the choroid plexus.
0021761	name:Name:limbic system development	info:Definition:The progression of the limbic system over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The limbic system is a collection of structures in the brain involved in emotion, motivation and emotional aspects of memory.
0021783	name:Name:preganglionic parasympathetic nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the preganglionic portion of the parasympathetic nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The parasympathetic nervous system is one of the two divisions of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system. Parasympathetic nerves emerge cranially as pre ganglionic fibers from oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus and from the sacral region of the spinal cord. Most neurons are cholinergic and responses are mediated by muscarinic receptors. The parasympathetic system innervates, for example: salivary glands, thoracic and abdominal viscera, bladder and genitalia.
0021784	name:Name:postganglionic parasympathetic nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the postganglionic portion of the parasympathetic nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The parasympathetic nervous system is one of the two divisions of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system. Parasympathetic nerves emerge cranially as pre ganglionic fibers from oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus and from the sacral region of the spinal cord. Most neurons are cholinergic and responses are mediated by muscarinic receptors. The parasympathetic system innervates, for example: salivary glands, thoracic and abdominal viscera, bladder and genitalia.
0022621	name:Name:shoot system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the shoot system over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0022622	name:Name:root system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the root system over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0035270	name:Name:endocrine system development	info:Definition:Progression of the endocrine system over time, from its formation to a mature structure. The endocrine system is a system of hormones and ductless glands, where the glands release hormones directly into the blood, lymph or other intercellular fluid, and the hormones circulate within the body to affect distant organs. The major glands that make up the human endocrine system are the hypothalamus, pituitary, thyroid, parathryoids, adrenals, pineal body, and the reproductive glands which include the ovaries and testes.
0035272	name:Name:exocrine system development	info:Definition:Progression of the exocrine system over time, from its formation to a mature structure. The exocrine system is a system of hormones and glands, where the glands secrete straight to a target site via ducts or tubes. The human exocrine system includes the salivary glands, sweat glands and many glands of the digestive system.
0048483	name:Name:autonomic nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the autonomic nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The autonomic nervous system is composed of neurons that are not under conscious control, and is comprised of two antagonistic components, the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The autonomic nervous system regulates key functions including the activity of the cardiac (heart) muscle, smooth muscles (e.g. of the gut), and glands.
0048484	name:Name:enteric nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the enteric nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The enteric nervous system is composed of two ganglionated neural plexuses in the gut wall which form one of the three major divisions of the autonomic nervous system. The enteric nervous system innervates the gastrointestinal tract, the pancreas, and the gall bladder. It contains sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons. Thus the circuitry can autonomously sense the tension and the chemical environment in the gut and regulate blood vessel tone, motility, secretions, and fluid transport. The system is itself governed by the central nervous system and receives both parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation.
0048485	name:Name:sympathetic nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the sympathetic nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The sympathetic nervous system is one of the two divisions of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system (the other being the parasympathetic nervous system). The sympathetic preganglionic neurons have their cell bodies in the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal cord and connect to the paravertebral chain of sympathetic ganglia. Innervate heart and blood vessels, sweat glands, viscera and the adrenal medulla. Most sympathetic neurons, but not all, use noradrenaline as a post-ganglionic neurotransmitter.
0048486	name:Name:parasympathetic nervous system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the parasympathetic nervous system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The parasympathetic nervous system is one of the two divisions of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system. Parasympathetic nerves emerge cranially as pre ganglionic fibers from oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus and from the sacral region of the spinal cord. Most neurons are cholinergic and responses are mediated by muscarinic receptors. The parasympathetic system innervates, for example: salivary glands, thoracic and abdominal viscera, bladder and genitalia.
0048880	name:Name:sensory system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a sensory system over time from its formation to the mature structure.
0055123	name:Name:digestive system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the digestive system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The digestive system is the entire structure in which digestion takes place. Digestion is all of the physical, chemical, and biochemical processes carried out by multicellular organisms to break down ingested nutrients into components that may be easily absorbed and directed into metabolism.
0060037	name:Name:pharyngeal system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pharyngeal system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The pharyngeal system is a transient embryonic complex that is specific to vertebrates. It comprises the pharyngeal arches, bulges of tissues of mesoderm and neural crest derivation through which pass nerves and pharyngeal arch arteries. The arches are separated internally by pharyngeal pouches, evaginations of foregut endoderm, and externally by pharyngeal clefts, invaginations of surface ectoderm. The development of the system ends when the stucture it contributes to are forming: the thymus, thyroid, parathyroids, maxilla, mandible, aortic arch, cardiac outflow tract, external and middle ear.
0060541	name:Name:respiratory system development	info:Definition:The progression of the respiratory system over time from its formation to its mature structure. The respiratory system carries out respiratory gaseous exchange.
0061008	name:Name:hepaticobiliary system development	name:Synonym:hepatobiliary system development	info:Definition:The progression of the hepaticobiliary system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The hepaticobiliary system is responsible for metabolic and catabolic processing of small molecules absorbed from the blood or gut, hormones and serum proteins, detoxification, storage of glycogen, triglycerides, metals and lipid soluble vitamins and excretion of bile. Included are the synthesis of albumin, blood coagulation factors, complement, and specific binding proteins.
0072001	name:Name:renal system development	name:Synonym:urinary system development	name:Synonym:urinary tract development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the renal system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The renal system maintains fluid balance and contributes to electrolyte balance, acid/base balance, and disposal of nitrogenous waste products. In humans, the renal system comprises a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, urinary bladder, urethra, sphincter muscle and associated blood vessels.
0072358	name:Name:cardiovascular system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cardiovascular system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cardiovascular system is the anatomical system that has as its parts the heart and blood vessels.
0072359	name:Name:circulatory system development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the circulatory system over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The circulatory system is the organ system that passes nutrients (such as amino acids and electrolytes), gases, hormones, blood cells, etc. to and from cells in the body to help fight diseases and help stabilize body temperature and pH to maintain homeostasis.
0048736	name:Name:appendage development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an appendage over time, from its formation to the mature structure. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism, such as a limb or a branch.
0033333	name:Name:fin development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a fin over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048737	name:Name:imaginal disc-derived appendage development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an appendage over time, from its formation in the imaginal disc to the mature structure. An appendage is an organ or part that is attached to the trunk of an organism.
0060173	name:Name:limb development	name:Synonym:limb bud development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A limb is an appendage of an animal used for locomotion or grasping. Examples include legs, arms or some types of fin.
0048827	name:Name:phyllome development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a phyllome over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A phyllome is a collective term for all the different types of leaves appearing on plants.
0010432	name:Name:bract development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the bract over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A bract is a leaf, usually different in form from the foliage leaves, subtending a flower or inflorescence.
0048366	name:Name:leaf development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the leaf over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048829	name:Name:root cap development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the root cap over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The root cap protects the root meristem from friction as the root grows through the soil. The cap is made up of a group of parenchyma cells which secrete a glycoprotein mucilage as a lubricant.
0048839	name:Name:inner ear development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inner ear over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0071599	name:Name:otic vesicle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the otic vesicle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The otic vesicle is a transient embryonic structure formed during development of the vertebrate inner ear.
0048840	name:Name:otolith development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the otolith over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0048857	name:Name:neural nucleus development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a neural nucleus from its initial condition to its mature state. A neural nucleus is an anatomical structure consisting of a discrete aggregate of neuronal soma.
0021713	name:Name:inferior olivary nucleus development	name:Synonym:inferior olive development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inferior olivary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The inferior olivary nucleus is a capsule-shaped structure in the ventral medulla located just lateral and dorsal to the medullary pyramids. Neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus are the source of climbing fiber input to the cerebellar cortex; these neurons have been implicated in various functions, such as learning and timing of movements.
0021718	name:Name:superior olivary nucleus development	name:Synonym:superior olive development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior olivary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. In mice, the superior olivary nucleus is a small cylindrical mass on the dorsal surface of the lateral part of the trapezoid body of the pons, and it is situated immediately above the inferior olivary nucleus. It receives projections from the cochlear nucleus and thus is involved in the perception of sound.
0021724	name:Name:inferior raphe nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inferior raphe nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021725	name:Name:superior raphe nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior raphe nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021726	name:Name:lateral reticular nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lateral reticular nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021730	name:Name:trigeminal sensory nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the trigeminal sensory nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021731	name:Name:trigeminal motor nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the trigeminal motor nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021736	name:Name:globose nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the globose nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021737	name:Name:emboliform nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the emboliform nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021738	name:Name:fastigial nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fastigial nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021739	name:Name:mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021740	name:Name:principal sensory nucleus of trigeminal nerve development	name:Synonym:pontine nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pontine nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021741	name:Name:spinal trigeminal nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the spinal trigeminal nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021742	name:Name:abducens nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the abducens nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021743	name:Name:hypoglossal nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hypoglossal nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021744	name:Name:dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021745	name:Name:nucleus ambiguus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the nucleus ambiguus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021746	name:Name:solitary nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the solitary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021747	name:Name:cochlear nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cochlear nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021750	name:Name:vestibular nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the vestibular nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021751	name:Name:salivary nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the salivary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021752	name:Name:inferior salivary nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inferior salivary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021753	name:Name:superior salivary nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior salivary nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021754	name:Name:facial nucleus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the facial nucleus over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0021757	name:Name:caudate nucleus development	info:Definition:The progression of the caudate nucleus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The caudate nucleus is the C-shaped structures of the striatum containing input neurons involved with control of voluntary movement in the brain.
0021763	name:Name:subthalamic nucleus development	name:Synonym:corpus luysi development	info:Definition:The progression of the subthalamic nucleus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The subthalamic nucleus is the lens-shaped nucleus located in the ventral part of the subthalamus on the inner aspect of the internal capsule that is concerned with the integration of somatic motor function.
0021768	name:Name:nucleus accumbens development	name:Synonym:accumbens nucleus development	name:Synonym:ventral striatum development	info:Definition:The progression of the nucleus accumbens over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The nucleus accumbens is a collection of pleomorphic cells in the caudal part of the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle, in the region of the olfactory tubercle, lying between the head of the caudate nucleus and the anterior perforated substance. It is part of the ventral striatum, a composite structure considered part of the basal ganglia.
0021771	name:Name:lateral geniculate nucleus development	name:Synonym:LGN development	info:Definition:The progression of the lateral geniculate nucleus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The lateral geniculate nucleus is the primary processor of visual information received from the retina.
0048890	name:Name:lateral line ganglion development	name:Synonym:gLL ganglion development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lateral line ganglion over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The lateral line ganglion develops from cranial ectodermal placodes situated between the eye and ear and behind the ear.
0048882	name:Name:lateral line development	name:Synonym:LL development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the lateral line over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The lateral line consists of small sensory patches (neuromasts) located superficially on the skin or just under the skin in fluid-filled canals on the head and body of all fishes and most amphibians. The lateral line develops from cranial ectodermal placodes situated behind the ear and between the eye and ear.
0048899	name:Name:anterior lateral line development	name:Synonym:anterior LL development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anterior lateral line over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The anterior lateral line consists of small sensory patches (neuromasts) located superficially on the skin or just under the skin in fluid-filled canals on the head of all fishes and most amphibians. The anterior lateral line develops from cranial ectodermal placodes situated between the eye and ear.
0048916	name:Name:posterior lateral line development	name:Synonym:PLL development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the posterior lateral line over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The posterior lateral line consists of small sensory patches (neuromasts) located superficially on the skin or just under the skin in fluid-filled canals on the body and trunk of all fishes and most amphibians. The posterior lateral line develops from cranial ectodermal placodes situated behind the ear.
0048887	name:Name:cupula development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cupula over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cupula is secreted by mantle cells and the ciliary bundles of all of the hair cells of the neuromast are embedded in it. The cupula provides a mechanical linkage between the hair cells and the external hydrodynamic environment. The cupula of superficial neuromasts grows continuously, while the height of the cupula of canal neuromasts is limited by canal diameter.
0048904	name:Name:anterior lateral line neuromast cupula development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anterior lateral line neuromast cupula over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cupula is secreted by mantle cells and the ciliary bundles of all of the hair cells of the neuromast are embedded in it. The cupula provides a mechanical linkage between the hair cells and the external hydrodynamic environment. The cupula of superficial neuromasts grows continuously, while the height of the cupula of canal neuromasts is limited by canal diameter.
0048921	name:Name:posterior lateral line neuromast cupula development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the posterior lateral line neuromast cupula over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cupula is secreted by mantle cells and the ciliary bundles of all of the hair cells of the neuromast are embedded in it. The cupula provides a mechanical linkage between the hair cells and the external hydrodynamic environment. The cupula of superficial neuromasts grows continuously, while the height of the cupula of canal neuromasts is limited by canal diameter.
0060021	name:Name:palate development	name:Synonym:palatum development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of the palate from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the structure and ends with the mature structure. The palate is the partition that separates the nasal and oral cavities.
0060022	name:Name:hard palate development	name:Synonym:palatum durum development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of the hard palate from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the structure and ends with the mature structure, whatever form that may be including its natural destruction. The hard palate is the anterior portion of the palate consisting of bone and mucous membranes.
0060023	name:Name:soft palate development	name:Synonym:palatum molle development	name:Synonym:velum palatum development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of the soft palate from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the structure and ends with the mature structure, whatever form that may be including its natural destruction. The soft palate is the posterior portion of the palate extending from the posterior edge of the hard palate.
0060041	name:Name:retina development in camera-type eye	name:Synonym:retina development in camera-style eye	name:Synonym:retinal development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the retina over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The retina is the innermost layer or coating at the back of the eyeball, which is sensitive to light and in which the optic nerve terminates.
0060166	name:Name:olfactory pit development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of the olfactory pit from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the olfactory pit, which is an indentation of the olfactory placode, and ends when the pits hollows out to form the nasopharynx.
0060322	name:Name:head development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a head from an initial condition to its mature state. The head is the anterior-most division of the body.
0097065	name:Name:anterior head development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the anterior part of the head over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0060324	name:Name:face development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a face from an initial condition to its mature state. The face is the ventral division of the head.
0060348	name:Name:bone development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of bone over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Bone is the hard skeletal connective tissue consisting of both mineral and cellular components.
0060430	name:Name:lung saccule development	name:Synonym:lung saccular development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a lung saccule from an initial condition to its mature state. The lung saccule is the primitive gas exchange portion of the lung composed of type I and type II cells.
0060435	name:Name:bronchiole development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a bronchiole from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the bronchiole and ends with the mature structure. A bronchiole is the first airway branch that no longer contains cartilage; it is a branch of the bronchi.
0060462	name:Name:lung lobe development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a lung lobe from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of a lung lobe by branching morphogenesis and ends with the mature structure. A lung lobe is one of the rounded projections that compose the lung.
0060465	name:Name:pharynx development	name:Synonym:pharyngeal development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a pharynx from an initial condition to its mature state. The pharynx is the part of the digestive system immediately posterior to the mouth.
0060618	name:Name:nipple development	info:Definition:The progression of the nipple over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The nipple is a part of the mammary gland that protrudes from the surface ectoderm.
0060711	name:Name:labyrinthine layer development	info:Definition:The process in which the labyrinthine layer of the placenta progresses, from its formation to its mature state.
0060712	name:Name:spongiotrophoblast layer development	info:Definition:The process in which the spongiotrophoblast layer of the placenta progresses from its formation to its mature state.
0060717	name:Name:chorion development	info:Definition:The biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a chorion from an initial condition to its mature state. This process begins with the formation of the structure and ends with the mature structure. The chorion is an extraembryonic membrane.
0060749	name:Name:mammary gland alveolus development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammary gland alveolus over time, from its formation to its mature state. The mammary gland alveolus is a sac-like structure that is found in the mature gland.
0060872	name:Name:semicircular canal development	info:Definition:The progression of the semicircular canal from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0060873	name:Name:anterior semicircular canal development	info:Definition:The progession of the anterior semicircular canal from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0060874	name:Name:posterior semicircular canal development	info:Definition:The progession of the posterior semicircular canal from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0060875	name:Name:lateral semicircular canal development	info:Definition:The progession of the lateral semicircular canal from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0060996	name:Name:dendritic spine development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the dendritic spine over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A dendritic spine is a protrusion from a dendrite and a specialized subcellular compartment involved in synaptic transmission.
0061009	name:Name:common bile duct development	name:Synonym:bile duct development	name:Synonym:CBD development	name:Synonym:EHBD development	name:Synonym:extrahepatic bile duct development	info:Definition:The progression of the common bile duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The common bile duct is formed from the joining of the common hepatic duct running from the liver, and the cystic duct running from the gall bladder. The common bile duct transports bile from the liver and gall bladder to the intestine.
0061011	name:Name:hepatic duct development	info:Definition:The progression of the hepatic duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The hepatic duct is the duct that leads from the liver to the common bile duct.
0061027	name:Name:umbilical cord development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the development of the umbilical cord, from its formation to the mature structure. The umbilical cord is an organ or embryonic origin consisting of the 2 umbilical arteries and the one umbilical vein. The umbilical cord connects the cardiovascular system of the fetus to the mother via the placenta.
0061029	name:Name:eyelid development in camera-type eye	info:Definition:The progression of the eyelid in a camera-type eye from its formation to the mature state. The eyelid is a membranous cover that helps protect and lubricate the eye.
0061032	name:Name:visceral serous pericardium development	name:Synonym:epicardium development	info:Definition:The progression of the visceral serous pericardium from its formation to the mature structure. The visceral serous pericardium is the inner layer of the pericardium.
0061034	name:Name:olfactory bulb mitral cell layer development	info:Definition:The progression of the olfactory bulb mitral cell layer over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The mitral cell layer is composed of pyramidal neurons whose cell bodies are located between the granule cell layer and the plexiform layer.
0061053	name:Name:somite development	info:Definition:The progression of a somite from its initial formation to the mature structure. Somites are mesodermal clusters that are arranged segmentally along the anterior posterior axis of an embryo.
0061054	name:Name:dermatome development	info:Definition:The progression of the dermatome over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The dermatome is the portion of a somite that will form skin.
0061055	name:Name:myotome development	info:Definition:The progression of the myotome over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The myotome is the portion of the somite that will give rise to muscle.
0061056	name:Name:sclerotome development	info:Definition:The progression of the sclerotome over time, from its initial formation to the mature structure. The sclerotome is the portion of the somite that will give rise to a vertebra.
0061061	name:Name:muscle structure development	info:Definition:The progression of a muscle structure over time, from its formation to its mature state. Muscle structures are contractile cells, tissues or organs that are found in multicellular organisms.
0007525	name:Name:somatic muscle development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the somatic muscle over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Somatic muscles are striated muscle structures that connect to the exoskeleton or cuticle.
0061079	name:Name:left horn of sinus venosus development	info:Definition:The progression of the left horn of the sinus venosus from its initial formation to the mature structure.
0061080	name:Name:right horn of sinus venosus development	info:Definition:The progression of the right horn of the sinus venosus from its formation to the mature structure.
0061152	name:Name:trachea submucosa development	info:Definition:The progression of the trachea submucosa over time from its formation to the mature structure. The trachea submucosa is made up of the glands and elastic tissue that lie under the mucosa in the trachea.
0061193	name:Name:taste bud development	info:Definition:The progression of the taste bud over time, from its formation to the mature state. The taste bud is a specialized area of the tongue that contains taste receptors.
0061196	name:Name:fungiform papilla development	info:Definition:The progression of the fungiform papilla over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The fungiform papilla is a mushroom-shaped papilla of the tongue.
0061303	name:Name:cornea development in camera-type eye	info:Definition:The progression of the cornea over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cornea is the transparent structure that covers the anterior of the eye.
0061360	name:Name:optic chiasma development	name:Synonym:optic chiasm development	info:Definition:The developmental process pertaining to the progression of the optic chiasm from its initial formation to the mature structure. The process begins when the pathfinding of the axons of the developing optic nerve cause some axons to cross at the midline of the brain and ends when the axons are mature.
0061373	name:Name:mammillary axonal complex development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammillary axonal complex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mammillary axonal complex is formed by the axons from the lateral, medial mammillary and the dorsal premammillary nuclei which share a branching pattern. Every neuron gives off one axonal stem that bifurcates into 2 branches. One of the branches is directed dorsally to the thalamus and another caudally to the midbrain.
0061374	name:Name:mammillothalamic axonal tract development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammillothalamic axonal tract, from its formation to the mature structure. The mammillothalamic tract is the collection of axons that connects the two major subdivisions of the diencephalon (hypothalamus and thalamus) and closes the diencephalic circuit.
0061375	name:Name:mammillotectal axonal tract development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammillotectal tract over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mammillotectal tract is the collection of axons that connects the ventral diencephalon to the superior colliculus.
0061376	name:Name:mammillotegmental axonal tract development	info:Definition:The process in which the mammillotegmental tract progresses over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mammillotegmental tract is the collection of axons that connects the ventral diencephalon to the tegmentum and pons.
0061377	name:Name:mammary gland lobule development	info:Definition:The progression of the mammary gland lobule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A mammary gland lobule is a small rounded projection of the mammary gland.
0061378	name:Name:corpora quadrigemina development	info:Definition:The progression of the corpora quadrigemina over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The corpora quadrigemina is a part of the midbrain that is made up of the superior and inferior colliculi.
0061379	name:Name:inferior colliculus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inferior colliculus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The inferior colliculus (IC) (Latin, lower hill) is the principal midbrain nucleus of the auditory pathway and receives input from several more peripheral brainstem nuclei in the auditory pathway, as well as inputs from the auditory cortex. The inferior colliculus has three subdivisions: the central nucleus (CIC), a dorsal cortex (DCIC) by which it is surrounded, and an external cortex (ICX) which is located laterally.
0061380	name:Name:superior colliculus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior colliculus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The superior colliculus is also known as the optic tectum or simply tectum and is a paired structure that forms a major component of the vertebrate midbrain.
0070121	name:Name:Kupffer's vesicle development	name:Synonym:KV development	info:Definition:The progression of the Kupffer's vesicle over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The Kupffer's vesicle is a small but distinctive epithelial sac containing fluid, located midventrally posterior to the yolk cell or its extension, and transiently present during most of the segmentation period.
0071109	name:Name:superior temporal gyrus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the superior temporal gyrus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The superior temporal gyrus is a portion of the cerebral cortex that extends from the lateral sulcus to the superior temporal sulcus.
0071696	name:Name:ectodermal placode development	info:Definition:The progression of an ectodermal placode over time from its initial formation until its mature state. An ectodermal placode is a thickening of the ectoderm that is the primordium of many structures derived from the ectoderm.
0071698	name:Name:olfactory placode development	info:Definition:The progression of the olfactory placode over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The olfactory placode is a thickening of the neural ectoderm in the head region of the vertebrate embryo which develops into the olfactory region of the nasal cavity.
0071728	name:Name:beak development	info:Definition:The progression of the beak over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The avian beak is an external anatomical structure, in the head region, that is adapted for feeding self and young, catching prey, probing, etc. It encompasses, but is not restricted to, the maxilla, mandible, maxillary ramaphotheca, mandibular ramaphotheca, nostril, nasal fossa, nasal bones, egg tooth and rictus.
0072006	name:Name:nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the nephron over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A nephron is the functional unit of the kidney.
0039019	name:Name:pronephric nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pronephric nephron over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A pronephric nephron is the functional unit of the pronephros.
0061215	name:Name:mesonephric nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nephron in the mesonephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A nephron is the functional unit of the kidney.
0072029	name:Name:long nephron development	name:Synonym:juxtamedullary nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a long nephron over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Long nephrons are associated with juxtamedullary glomeruli and extend into the inner medulla.
0072030	name:Name:short nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a short nephron over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Short nephrons are associated with mid-cortical and superficial glomeruli, are situated entirely in the outer medulla, and have no thin ascending limb.
0072210	name:Name:metanephric nephron development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a nephron in the metanephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. A nephron is the functional unit of the kidney.
0072013	name:Name:glomus development	name:Synonym:pronephric glomus development	info:Definition:The progression of the glomus over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The glomus forms from the splanchnic intermediate mesoderm and is the vascularized filtration unit, filtering the blood before it enters the tubules. The glomus is external to the nephron and extends over more than one body segment.
0072019	name:Name:proximal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The proximal convoluted tubule is the most proximal portion of the proximal tubule and extends from the glomerular capsule to the proximal straight tubule.
0072229	name:Name:metanephric proximal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric proximal convoluted tubule is the most proximal portion of the metanephric proximal tubule and extends from the metanephric glomerular capsule to the metanephric proximal straight tubule.
0072020	name:Name:proximal straight tubule development	name:Synonym:S3 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the proximal straight tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The proximal straight tubule is the part of the descending limb that extends from the proximal convoluted tubule to the descending thin tubule.
0072230	name:Name:metanephric proximal straight tubule development	name:Synonym:metanephric S3 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric proximal straight tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric proximal straight tubule is the part of the metanephric descending limb that extends from the metanephric proximal convoluted tubule to the metanephric descending thin tubule.
0072021	name:Name:ascending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of an ascending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The ascending thin limb is a segment of a nephron tubule lying in the inner medulla that is permeable to ions but not to water and has a simple epithelium; active transepithelial solute transport is absent.
0072218	name:Name:metanephric ascending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a metanephric ascending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric ascending thin limb is a segment of a nephron tubule in the metanephros lying in the inner medulla that is permeable to ions but not to water and has a simple epithelium; active transepithelial solute transport is absent.
0072022	name:Name:descending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the descending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The descending thin limb is a part of the loop of Henle situated just after the proximal straight tubule (S3). It extends to the tip of the loop of Henle.
0072063	name:Name:short descending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the short descending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The short descending thin limb is the descending thin limb of a short nephron that has a squamous epithelial morphology.
0072064	name:Name:long descending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the long descending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The long descending thin limb is the descending thin limb of a long nephron that has a squamous epithelial morphology. The long descending limb starts in the inner stripe of the outer medulla and extends into the inner medulla.
0072220	name:Name:metanephric descending thin limb development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric descending thin limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric descending thin limb is a part of the metanephric loop of Henle situated just after the proximal straight tubule (S3). It extends to the tip of the metanephric loop of Henle.
0072023	name:Name:thick ascending limb development	name:Synonym:TAL development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the thick ascending limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The thick ascending limb is the last part of the loop of Henle. Its thick, mitochondria-rich epithelium characterizes the outer medulla, and is responsible for very avid active salt transport. At the macula densa, the thick ascending limb connects to the distal convoluted tubule.
0072233	name:Name:metanephric thick ascending limb development	name:Synonym:metanephric TAL development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric thick ascending limb over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric thick ascending limb is the last part of the metanephric loop of Henle. Its thick, mitochondria-rich epithelium characterizes the outer medulla, and is responsible for very avid active salt transport. At the macula densa, the thick ascending limb connects to the distal convoluted tubule.
0072024	name:Name:macula densa development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the macula densa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The macula densa is an area of specialized cells in the distal tubule that makes contact with the vascular pole of the glomerulus.
0061220	name:Name:mesonephric macula densa development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesonephric macula densa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mesonephric macula densa is an area of specialized cells in the distal tubule of the mesonephros that makes contact with the vascular pole of the glomerulus.
0072227	name:Name:metanephric macula densa development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric macula densa over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric macula densa is an area of specialized cells in the distal tubule of the metanephros that makes contact with the vascular pole of the glomerulus.
0072025	name:Name:distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The distal convoluted tubule is a portion of the nephron tubule that connects the loop of Henle to the collecting duct.
0072221	name:Name:metanephric distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric distal convoluted tubule is a portion of the metanephric nephron tubule that connects the metanephric loop of Henle to the collecting duct.
0072031	name:Name:proximal convoluted tubule segment 1 development	name:Synonym:S1 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the S1 portion of the proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The S1 portion is the initial portion of the proximal convoluted tubule and is responsible for avid reabsorption of water and solutes.
0072231	name:Name:metanephric proximal convoluted tubule segment 1 development	name:Synonym:metanephric S1 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the S1 portion of the metanephric proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The S1 portion is the initial portion of the metanephric proximal convoluted tubule and is responsible for avid reabsorption of water and solutes.
0072032	name:Name:proximal convoluted tubule segment 2 development	name:Synonym:S2 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the S2 portion of the proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The S2 portion of the tubule is involved in reabsorption of water and sodium chloride.
0072232	name:Name:metanephric proximal convoluted tubule segment 2 development	name:Synonym:metanephric S2 development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the S2 portion of the metanephric proximal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The S2 portion of the metanephric proximal tubule is involved in reabsorption of water and sodium chloride.
0072044	name:Name:collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a collecting duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The collecting duct responds to vasopressin and aldosterone to regulate water, electrolyte and acid-base balance. It is the final common path through which urine flows before entering the ureter and then emptying into the bladder.
0061211	name:Name:mesonephric collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a collecting duct in the mesonephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The collecting duct regulates water, electrolyte and acid-base balance. The collecting duct is the final common path through which urine flows before entering the ureter and then emptying into the bladder.
0072060	name:Name:outer medullary collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the outer medullary collecting duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The outer medullary collecting duct is the portion of the collecting duct that lies in the renal outer medulla.
0072061	name:Name:inner medullary collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inner medullary collecting duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The inner medullary collecting duct is the portion of the collecting duct that lies in the renal inner medulla.
0072205	name:Name:metanephric collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of a collecting duct in the metanephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The collecting duct responds to vasopressin and aldosterone to regulate water, electrolyte and acid-base balance. The collecting duct is the final common path through which urine flows before entering the ureter and then emptying into the bladder.
0072051	name:Name:juxtaglomerular apparatus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the juxtaglomerular apparatus over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The juxtaglomerular apparatus is an anatomical structure that lies adjacent to the glomerulus and regulates kidney function.
0061212	name:Name:mesonephric juxtaglomerular apparatus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the juxtaglomerular apparatus in the mesonephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The juxtaglomerular apparatus is an anatomical structure which consists of juxtaglomerular cells, extraglomerular mesangial cells and the macula densa. The juxtaglomerular apparatus lies adjacent to the glomerulus and regulates kidney function by maintaining the blood flow to the kidney and the filtration rate.
0072206	name:Name:metanephric juxtaglomerular apparatus development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the juxtaglomerular apparatus in the metanephros over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The juxtaglomerular apparatus is an anatomical structure which consists of juxtaglomerular cells, extraglomerular mesangial cells and the macula densa. The juxtaglomerular apparatus lies adjacent to the glomerulus and regulates kidney function by maintaining the blood flow to the kidney and the filtration rate.
0072053	name:Name:renal inner medulla development	name:Synonym:inner renal medulla development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the renal inner medulla over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The renal inner medulla is unique to mammalian kidneys and is the innermost region of the mammalian kidney.
0072054	name:Name:renal outer medulla development	name:Synonym:outer renal medulla development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the renal outer medulla over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The renal outer medulla is the region of the kidney that lies between the renal cortex and the renal inner medulla.
0072055	name:Name:renal cortex development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the renal cortex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The renal cortex is the outer region of the kidney.
0072214	name:Name:metanephric cortex development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric cortex over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric cortex is the outer region of the metanephros.
0072056	name:Name:pyramid development	name:Synonym:kidney pyramid development	name:Synonym:pyramids development	name:Synonym:renal medulla development	name:Synonym:renal pyramid development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the kidney pyramids over time, from its formation to the mature structure. Kidney pyramids are the conical masses that constitute the renal medulla in a multi-lobed mammalian kidney; they contain the loops of Henle and the medullary collecting ducts.
0072211	name:Name:metanephric pyramids development	name:Synonym:metanephric kidney pyramid development	name:Synonym:metanephric pyramids development	name:Synonym:metanephric renal medulla development	name:Synonym:metanephric renal pyramid development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric pyramids over time, from their formation to the mature structures. Metanephric pyramids are the conical masses that constitute the renal medulla in a metanephros; they contain the loops of Henle and the medullary collecting ducts.
0072057	name:Name:inner stripe development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the inner stripe over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The inner stripe is a deep, centrally located portion of the renal outer medulla and is traversed by thin descending and thick ascending portions of the loops of Henle.
0072058	name:Name:outer stripe development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the outer stripe over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The outer stripe is the region of the kidney outer medulla that lies just below the cortex. The proximal straight tubules (S3) characterize this region.
0072059	name:Name:cortical collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the cortical collecting duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The cortical collecting duct is the portion of the collecting duct that resides in the renal cortex.
0072219	name:Name:metanephric cortical collecting duct development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric cortical collecting duct over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric cortical collecting duct is the portion of the metanephric collecting duct that resides in the renal cortex.
0072065	name:Name:long descending thin limb bend development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the long descending thin limb bend over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The long descending thin limb bend is a part of the descending thin limb of a long nephron that lies beyond the prebend segment.
0072226	name:Name:metanephric long descending thin limb bend development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric long descending thin limb bend over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric long descending thin limb bend is a part of the descending thin limb of a long nephron that lies beyond the prebend segment in the metanephros.
0072066	name:Name:prebend segment development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the prebend segment over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The prebend segment is a part of the descending thin limb that lies before the bend and exhibits permeabilities characteristic of the ascending limb, especially negligible water permeability.
0072228	name:Name:metanephric prebend segment development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric prebend segment over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric prebend segment is a part of the metanephric descending thin limb that lies before the bend and exhibits permeabilities characteristic of the ascending limb, especially negligible water permeability.
0072067	name:Name:early distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the early distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The early distal convoluted tubule contains DCT cells and is vasopressin-insensitive.
0072222	name:Name:metanephric early distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric early distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric early distal convoluted tubule contains metanephric DCT cells and is vasopressin-insensitive.
0072068	name:Name:late distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the late distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The late distal convoluted tubule contains DCT cells and intercalated (IC) alpha and beta cells and is vasopressin-sensitive.
0072225	name:Name:metanephric late distal convoluted tubule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric late distal convoluted tubule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric late distal convoluted tubule contains metanephric DCT cells and intercalated (IC) alpha and beta cells and is vasopressin-sensitive.
0072109	name:Name:glomerular mesangium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the glomerular mesangium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The glomerular mesangium is the thin membrane connective tissue composed of mesangial cells, which helps to support the capillary loops in a renal glomerulus.
0061247	name:Name:mesonephric glomerular mesangium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the mesonephric glomerular mesangium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mesonephric glomerular mesangium is the thin membrane connective tissue composed of mesangial cells in the mesonephros, which helps to support the capillary loops in a renal glomerulus.
0072223	name:Name:metanephric glomerular mesangium development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric glomerular mesangium over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric glomerular mesangium is the thin membrane connective tissue composed of mesangial cells in the metanephros, which helps to support the capillary loops in a renal glomerulus.
0072127	name:Name:renal capsule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the renal capsule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The renal capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the kidney, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage. During development, it comprises a single layer of flattened cells that lie just above the cortical stroma and the condensed mesenchyme of the nephrogenic zone. It is in this region that the early stages of nephron induction and formation of new generations ureteric bud branches occur, as the kidney expands.
0061285	name:Name:mesonephric capsule development	info:Definition:The progression of the mesonephric capsule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The mesonephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the mesonephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue.
0072213	name:Name:metanephric capsule development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metanephric capsule over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metanephric capsule is the tough fibrous layer surrounding the metanephros, covered in a thick layer of perinephric adipose tissue. It provides some protection from trauma and damage.
0072360	name:Name:vascular cord development	info:Definition:The progression of the vascular cord over time from its initial formation until its mature state. The vascular cord is the primordial vasculature that will develop into blood vessels by the process of tubulogenesis.
0090058	name:Name:metaxylem development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the metaxylem over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The metaxylem is the part of the primary xylem that differentiates after the protoxylem and before the secondary xylem, if any of the latter is formed.
0090059	name:Name:protoxylem development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the protoxylem over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The protoxylem comprises the first formed elements of the primary xylem.
0090102	name:Name:cochlea development	info:Definition:The progression of the cochlea over time from its formation to the mature structure. The cochlea is the snail-shaped portion of the inner ear that is responsible for the detection of sound.
0055046	name:Name:microgametogenesis	name:Synonym:pollen development from the microspore	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the pollen grain over time, from its formation as the microspore to the mature structure.
0060033	name:Name:anatomical structure regression	info:Definition:The developmental process in which an anatomical stucture is destroyed as a part of its normal progression.
0060032	name:Name:notochord regression	info:Definition:The developmental process in which the stucture of the notochord is destroyed in an embryo.
0060641	name:Name:mammary gland duct regression in males	info:Definition:The process in which the epithelium of the mammary duct is destroyed in males.
0060384	name:Name:innervation	info:Definition:The process in which a nerve invades a tissue and makes functional synaptic connection within the tissue.
0071684	name:Name:organism emergence from protective structure	info:Definition:The developmental process in which an organism emerges from a surrounding protective structure such as an egg or pupa case.
0007562	name:Name:eclosion	info:Definition:The emergence of an adult insect from a pupa case.
0035188	name:Name:hatching	info:Definition:The emergence of an immature organism from a protective structure.
0001835	name:Name:blastocyst hatching	info:Definition:The hatching of the cellular blastocyst from the zona pellucida.
0040007	name:Name:growth	name:Synonym:growth pattern	name:Synonym:non-developmental growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an entire organism, a part of an organism or a cell.
0007117	name:Name:budding cell bud growth	name:Synonym:bud growth	info:Definition:The process in which the bud portion of a cell that reproduces by budding irreversibly increases in size over time by accretion and biosynthetic production of matter similar to that already present.
0007118	name:Name:budding cell apical bud growth	name:Synonym:apical bud growth	info:Definition:Growth at the tip of a bud, in a cell that reproduces by budding.
0007119	name:Name:budding cell isotropic bud growth	name:Synonym:isotropic bud growth	info:Definition:Unlocalized bud growth such that the entire surface of the bud expands evenly, in a cell that reproduces by budding.
0030447	name:Name:filamentous growth	info:Definition:The process in which a multicellular organism, a unicellular organism or a group of unicellular organisms grow in a threadlike, filamentous shape.
0030448	name:Name:hyphal growth	info:Definition:Growth of fungi as threadlike, tubular structures that may contain multiple nuclei and may or may not be divided internally by septa, or cross-walls.
0044180	name:Name:filamentous growth of a unicellular organism	info:Definition:The process in which a unicellular organism grows in a threadlike, filamentous shape.
0044182	name:Name:filamentous growth of a population of unicellular organisms	info:Definition:The process in which a group of unicellular organisms grow in a threadlike, filamentous shape.
0070783	name:Name:growth of unicellular organism as a thread of attached cells	info:Definition:A filamentous growth process in which cells remain attached after division and form thread-like filaments that may penetrate into a solid growth medium such as an agar plate, exhibited by unicellular fungi under certain growth conditions.
0035265	name:Name:organ growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organ. Organs are commonly observed as visibly distinct structures, but may also exist as loosely associated clusters of cells that function together as to perform a specific function.
0060419	name:Name:heart growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of the heart.
0060437	name:Name:lung growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a lung. In all air-breathing vertebrates the lungs are developed from the ventral wall of the oesophagus as a pouch which divides into two sacs. In amphibians and many reptiles the lungs retain very nearly this primitive sac-like character, but in the higher forms the connection with the esophagus becomes elongated into the windpipe and the inner walls of the sacs become more and more divided, until, in the mammals, the air spaces become minutely divided into tubes ending in small air cells, in the walls of which the blood circulates in a fine network of capillaries. In mammals the lungs are more or less divided into lobes, and each lung occupies a separate cavity in the thorax.
0080112	name:Name:seed growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a seed. Seed is a propagating organ formed in the reproductive cycle of gymnosperms and angiosperms, derived from the ovule and enclosing an embryo.
0044110	name:Name:growth involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:growth during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism occurring when the organism is in a symbiotic interaction.
0044112	name:Name:growth in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:growth in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism, occurring within the cells or tissues of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down the tissue of the second organism.
0044116	name:Name:growth of symbiont involved in interaction with host	name:Synonym:growth of symbiont during interaction with host	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism, occurring in, on or near the exterior of its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044117	name:Name:growth of symbiont in host	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism, occurring within the cells or tissues of the host organism. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down host tissue. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044133	name:Name:growth of symbiont on or near host	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a symbiont within the cells or tissues of its host organism.
0044153	name:Name:growth on or near surface of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:growth on or near surface of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism occurring on or near the exterior of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044151	name:Name:growth of organism on or near symbiont surface	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of an organism occurring on or near the exterior of its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0055017	name:Name:cardiac muscle tissue growth	name:Synonym:heart muscle growth	info:Definition:The increase in size or mass of a cardiac muscle, where the increase in size or mass has the specific outcome of the progression of the organism over time from one condition to another.
0003245	name:Name:cardiac muscle tissue growth involved in heart morphogenesis	info:Definition:The developmental growth of cardiac muscle tissue that contributes to the shaping of the heart.
0080117	name:Name:secondary growth	info:Definition:Increase in plant girth due to the activity of lateral meristems (vascular and cork cambium).
0040011	name:Name:locomotion	info:Definition:Self-propelled movement of a cell or organism from one location to another.
0031987	name:Name:locomotion involved in locomotory behavior	name:Synonym:locomotion during locomotory behaviour	info:Definition:Self-propelled movement of a cell or organism from one location to another in a behavioral context; the aspect of locomotory behavior having to do with movement.
0060362	name:Name:flight involved in flight behavior	info:Definition:Self-propelled movement of an organism from one location to another through the air that is part of the organism's response to external or internal stimuli resulting in flight.
0033058	name:Name:directional locomotion	info:Definition:Self-propelled movement of a cell or organism from one location to another along an axis.
0043056	name:Name:forward locomotion	info:Definition:Anterior movement of an organism, following the direction of the head of the animal.
0043057	name:Name:backward locomotion	info:Definition:Posterior movement of an organism, e.g. following the direction of the tail of an animal.
0042330	name:Name:taxis	name:Synonym:directed movement in response to stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to an external stimulus.
0001966	name:Name:thigmotaxis	name:Synonym:stereotaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:taxis in response to touch stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to touch.
0006935	name:Name:chemotaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to chemical stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism, or the directed growth of a cell guided by a specific chemical concentration gradient. Movement may be towards a higher concentration (positive chemotaxis) or towards a lower concentration (negative chemotaxis).
0007411	name:Name:axon guidance	name:Synonym:axon chemotaxis	name:Synonym:axon growth cone guidance	name:Synonym:axon pathfinding	info:Definition:The chemotaxis process that directs the migration of an axon growth cone to a specific target site in response to a combination of attractive and repulsive cues.
0009454	name:Name:aerotaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to atmospheric oxygen	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to environmental oxygen.
0009455	name:Name:redox taxis	name:Synonym:redoxtaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to redox potential	name:Synonym:taxis in response to redox stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to redox potential.
0034670	name:Name:chemotaxis to arachidonic acid	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to the presence of arachidonic acid.
0042333	name:Name:chemotaxis to oxidizable substrate	name:Synonym:taxis in response to oxidizable substrate	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to the presence of an oxidizable substrate, for example, fructose.
0043326	name:Name:chemotaxis to folate	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to the presence of folate.
0043327	name:Name:chemotaxis to cAMP	name:Synonym:chemotaxis to 3',5' cAMP	name:Synonym:chemotaxis to 3',5'-cAMP	name:Synonym:chemotaxis to adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate	name:Synonym:chemotaxis to cyclic AMP	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to the presence of 3',5'-cAMP.
0050918	name:Name:positive chemotaxis	name:Synonym:chemoattraction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a higher concentration of a chemical.
0050919	name:Name:negative chemotaxis	name:Synonym:chemoaversion	name:Synonym:chemorepulsion	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a lower concentration of a chemical.
0052216	name:Name:chemotaxis in environment of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:chemotaxis in environment of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:chemotaxis in response to environment of other organism	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a specific chemical concentration gradient on, within or near a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0009453	name:Name:energy taxis	name:Synonym:energytaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to energy source	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to physical parameters involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates.
0042331	name:Name:phototaxis	name:Synonym:phototactic behavior	name:Synonym:phototactic behaviour	name:Synonym:taxis in response to light	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to light.
0042334	name:Name:taxis to electron acceptor	name:Synonym:taxis in response to electron acceptor	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to the presence of an alternative electron acceptor, for example, nitrate.
0052128	name:Name:positive energy taxis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a higher level of a physical stimulus involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates.
0052129	name:Name:negative energy taxis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards a lower level of a physical stimulus involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates.
0052215	name:Name:energy taxis in environment of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:energy taxis in environment of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:energy taxis in response to environment of other organism	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in the environment of a second organism in response to physical parameters involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0021844	name:Name:interneuron sorting involved in substrate-independent cerebral cortex tangential migration	info:Definition:The establishment and response to guidance cues that distribute interneurons to different cerebral cortex structures.
0042332	name:Name:gravitaxis	name:Synonym:geotactic behavior	name:Synonym:geotactic behaviour	name:Synonym:geotaxis	name:Synonym:gravitactic behavior	name:Synonym:gravitactic behaviour	name:Synonym:taxis in response to gravitational stimulus	name:Synonym:taxis in response to gravity	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to gravity.
0048060	name:Name:negative gravitaxis	name:Synonym:negative geotactic behavior	name:Synonym:negative geotactic behaviour	name:Synonym:negative gravitactic behavior	name:Synonym:negative gravitactic behaviour	name:Synonym:negative taxis in response to gravity	name:Synonym:negative taxis in response to gravitytaxis in response to gravitational stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism away from the source of gravity.
0048061	name:Name:positive gravitaxis	name:Synonym:positive geotactic behavior	name:Synonym:positive geotactic behaviour	name:Synonym:positive gravitactic behavior	name:Synonym:positive gravitactic behaviour	name:Synonym:positive taxis in response to gravity	name:Synonym:positive taxis in response to gravitytaxis in response to gravitational stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism towards the source of gravity.
0043052	name:Name:thermotaxis	name:Synonym:taxis in response to temperature stimulus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a temperature gradient. Movement may be towards either a higher or lower temperature.
0051821	name:Name:dissemination or transmission of organism from other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:dissemination or transmission of organism from other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The movement of an organism from a second organism to another place in the environment, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction. The first organism may also move to a different organism.
0044007	name:Name:dissemination or transmission of symbiont from host	name:Synonym:dissemination or transmission of organism from host	info:Definition:The movement of an organism from a host to another host or from a host to another place in the environment. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044008	name:Name:dissemination or transmission of symbiont from host by vector	name:Synonym:dissemination or transmission of organism from host by vector	info:Definition:The movement of an organism from one host to another (or another place in the environment) by means of a third organism (often an insect or other animal). The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051822	name:Name:dissemination or transmission of organism from other organism by vector involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:dissemination or transmission of organism from other organism by vector during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The movement of an organism from a second organism to another place in the environment by means of a vector, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction. The first organism may also move to a different organism, and the vector organism is often an insect or an animal.
0052192	name:Name:movement in environment of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:locomotion in environment of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:movement in environment of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on, within or near a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051814	name:Name:movement in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:movement in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:movement within other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The process in which an organism or its progeny spreads from one location to another within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044000	name:Name:movement in host	name:Synonym:movement of symbiont in host	name:Synonym:movement of symbiont within host	name:Synonym:movement within host	name:Synonym:symbiont movement in host	name:Synonym:symbiont movement within host	info:Definition:The process in which an organism or its progeny spreads from one location to another within its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051815	name:Name:migration in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:migration in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:migration within other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directional movement of an organism from one place to another within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052224	name:Name:energy taxis in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:energy taxis in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:energy taxis within other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism within a second organism in response to physical parameters involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052242	name:Name:chemotaxis in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:chemotaxis in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:chemotaxis within other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a specific chemical concentration gradient within a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051828	name:Name:entry into other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:entry into other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:invasion into other organism	name:Synonym:invasion of other organism	name:Synonym:invasive growth	name:Synonym:other organism invasion	info:Definition:Penetration by an organism into the body, tissues, or cells of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044409	name:Name:entry into host	name:Synonym:host invasion	name:Synonym:invasion into host	name:Synonym:invasion of host	name:Synonym:invasive growth	info:Definition:Penetration by an organism into the body, tissues, or cells of the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051806	name:Name:entry into cell of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:entry into cell of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:other organism cell invasion	info:Definition:The invasion by an organism of a cell of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051829	name:Name:entry into other organism through natural portals involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:entry into other organism through natural portals during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Penetration by an organism into a second organism via naturally occurring openings in the second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051830	name:Name:entry into other organism through barriers of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:entry into other organism through barriers of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Penetration by an organism into a second organism via active breaching of physical barriers, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052126	name:Name:movement in host environment	name:Synonym:movement in response to host	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on, within or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0035890	name:Name:exit from host	name:Synonym:ejection from host	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism out of the body, tissues or cells of the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052115	name:Name:energy taxis in host environment	name:Synonym:energy taxis in response to host environment	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in the environment of its host organism in response to physical parameters involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052116	name:Name:chemotaxis in host environment	name:Synonym:chemotaxis in response to host environment	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a specific chemical concentration gradient on, within or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052127	name:Name:movement on or near host	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052193	name:Name:movement in symbiont environment	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on, within or near its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052194	name:Name:movement on or near symbiont	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on or near its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052195	name:Name:movement on or near other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:movement on or near other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organism or motile cell on or near a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052225	name:Name:energy taxis on or near other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:energy taxis on or near other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism on or near a second organism in response to physical parameters involved in energy generation, such as light, oxygen, and oxidizable substrates, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052243	name:Name:chemotaxis on or near other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:chemotaxis on or near other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a specific chemical concentration gradient on or near a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0060361	name:Name:flight	info:Definition:Self-propelled movement of an organism from one location to another through the air, usually by means of active wing movement.
0043473	name:Name:pigmentation	info:Definition:The deposition or aggregation of coloring matter in an organism, tissue or cell.
0033060	name:Name:ocellus pigmentation	info:Definition:The deposition or aggregation of coloring matter in an ocellus, a minute simple eye found in many invertebrates.
0043476	name:Name:pigment accumulation	name:Synonym:pigment accumulation in response to external stimulus	info:Definition:The aggregation of coloring matter in a particular location in an organism, tissue or cell, occurring in response to some external stimulus.
0043478	name:Name:pigment accumulation in response to UV light	info:Definition:The aggregation of coloring matter in a particular location in an organism, tissue or cell, occurring in response to a UV light stimulus.
0048511	name:Name:rhythmic process	name:Synonym:rhythm	info:Definition:Any process pertinent to the generation and maintenance of rhythms in the physiology of an organism.
0007622	name:Name:rhythmic behavior	name:Synonym:rhythmic behavioral response to stimulus	name:Synonym:rhythmic behaviour	name:Synonym:rhythmic behavioural response to stimulus	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that recur with measured regularity.
0048512	name:Name:circadian behavior	name:Synonym:circadian rhythm behavior	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that recur with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0008062	name:Name:eclosion rhythm	info:Definition:The timing of the emergence of the adult fly from its pupal case, which usually occurs at dawn.
0022410	name:Name:circadian sleep/wake cycle process	info:Definition:A behavioral process involved in the cycle from wakefulness through an orderly succession of sleep states and stages that occurs on an approximately 24 hour rhythm.
0042745	name:Name:circadian sleep/wake cycle	info:Definition:The cycle from wakefulness through an orderly succession of sleep states and stages that occurs on an approximately 24 hour rhythm.
0045475	name:Name:locomotor rhythm	name:Synonym:circadian locomotor activity rhythm	info:Definition:The rhythm of the locomotor activity of an organism during its 24 hour activity cycle.
0007623	name:Name:circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:circadian process	name:Synonym:circadian response	name:Synonym:response to circadian rhythm	info:Definition:Any biological process in an organism that recurs with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0003052	name:Name:circadian regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism modulates its blood pressure at different values with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0003054	name:Name:circadian regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure by the suprachiasmatic nucleus	name:Synonym:master pacemaker clock regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:SCN regulation of blood pressure	info:Definition:The process in which the suprachiasmatic nucleus modulates blood pressure at different values with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0003053	name:Name:circadian regulation of heart rate	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of heart contraction rate	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism modulates its heart rate at different values with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0003055	name:Name:circadian regulation of heart rate by the suprachiasmatic nucleus	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of heart contraction rate by the suprachiasmatic nucleus	name:Synonym:master pacemaker clock regulation of heart rate	name:Synonym:SCN regulation of heart rate	info:Definition:The process in which the suprachiasmatic nucleus modulates heart rate at different values with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0010617	name:Name:circadian regulation of calcium ion oscillation	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of [Ca2+]cyt oscillation	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of Ca2+ oscillation	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of cytosolic calcium ion homeostasis	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of cytosolic free calcium ion oscillation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the concentration of cytosolic free calcium ion [Ca2+]cyt with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0032922	name:Name:circadian regulation of gene expression	name:Synonym:circadian regulation of protein expression	name:Synonym:diurnal variation of gene expression	name:Synonym:diurnal variation of protein expression	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of gene expression such that an expression pattern recurs with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0007624	name:Name:ultradian rhythm	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that recur with a regularity more frequent than every 24 hours.
0035882	name:Name:defecation rhythm	name:Synonym:defecation behavior	name:Synonym:defecation cycle	name:Synonym:defecation motor program	name:Synonym:DMP	info:Definition:The rhythmic process of defecation that consists of an intestinal oscillator which regulates calcium waves. These waves in turn control a stereotypical, three-part pattern of muscle contractions. In some organisms, defecation can recur with a regularity more frequent than every 24 hours. For example, in a well-fed Caenorhabditis elegans, the defecation motor program occurs approximately every 45 seconds, and is temperature- and touch-compensated.
0022602	name:Name:ovulation cycle process	name:Synonym:estrous cycle process	name:Synonym:menstrual cycle process	info:Definition:A process involved in the sexual cycle seen in females, often with physiologic changes in the endometrium that recur at regular intervals during the reproductive years.
0001541	name:Name:ovarian follicle development	name:Synonym:follicular phase	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the ovarian follicle over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0001543	name:Name:ovarian follicle rupture	info:Definition:Disruption of theca cell layer releasing follicular fluid and/or the oocyte.
0001544	name:Name:initiation of primordial ovarian follicle growth	info:Definition:Increase in size of primordial follicles including proliferation and shape changes of granulosa and/or theca cells until oocyte is surrounded by one layer of cuboidal shaped granulosa cells (primary follicle).
0001545	name:Name:primary ovarian follicle growth	info:Definition:Increase in size of primary follicles including oocyte growth and granulosa and/or theca cell proliferation until more than one layer of granulosa cells is present (preantral follicle).
0043929	name:Name:primary ovarian follicle growth involved in double layer follicle stage	name:Synonym:primary ovarian follicle growth during double layer follicle stage	info:Definition:Increase in size of primary follicles including oocyte growth and granulosa and/or theca cell proliferation until more than one layer of granulosa cells is present (preantral follicle), as part of the double layer follicle stage of oogenesis.
0043930	name:Name:primary ovarian follicle growth involved in primary follicle stage	name:Synonym:primary ovarian follicle growth during primary follicle stage	info:Definition:Increase in size of primary follicles including oocyte growth and granulosa and/or theca cell proliferation until more than one layer of granulosa cells is present (preantral follicle) as part of the primary follicle stage of oogenesis.
0001546	name:Name:preantral ovarian follicle growth	info:Definition:Increase in size of follicles surrounded by two or more layers of granulosa cells up to the onset of antrum formation.
0001548	name:Name:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum	name:Synonym:ovarian follicle antrum/follicular fluid biosynthesis	name:Synonym:ovarian follicle antrum/follicular fluid formation	info:Definition:The menstrual cycle process that results in the formation of one central cavity separating the oocyte/cumulus complex from mural granulosa and theca cells during the various stages of oogenesis.
0003003	name:Name:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum involved in fused antrum stage	name:Synonym:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum during fused antrum stage	info:Definition:The ovulation cycle process in which one central cavity separating the oocyte/cumulus complex from mural granulosa and theca cells is formed as part of the fused antrum stage of oogenesis.
0003004	name:Name:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum involved in distinct antral spaces stage	name:Synonym:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum during distinct antral spaces stage	info:Definition:The menstrual cycle process in which one central cavity separating the oocyte/cumulus complex from mural granulosa and theca cells is formed as part of the antral spaces stage of oogenesis.
0003005	name:Name:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum involved in scattered antral spaces stage	name:Synonym:follicular fluid formation in ovarian follicle antrum during scattered antral spaces stage	info:Definition:The menstrual cycle process in which one central cavity separating the oocyte/cumulus complex from mural granulosa and theca cells is formed as part of the scattered antral spaces stage of oogenesis.
0001550	name:Name:ovarian cumulus expansion	name:Synonym:ovarian cumulus growth	info:Definition:Increase in size of the cumulus surrounding the oocyte including change in morphology due to proliferation and dispersion of cumulus cells.
0001551	name:Name:ovarian follicle endowment	info:Definition:Association of oocytes with supporting epithelial granulosa cells to form primordial follicles.
0001553	name:Name:luteinization	name:Synonym:luteal phase	info:Definition:The set of processes resulting in differentiation of theca and granulosa cells into luteal cells and in the formation of a corpus luteum after ovulation.
0001554	name:Name:luteolysis	info:Definition:The lysis or structural demise of the corpus luteum. During normal luteolysis, two closely related events occur. First, there is loss of the capacity to synthesize and secrete progesterone (functional luteolysis) followed by loss of the cells that comprise the corpus luteum (structural luteolysis). Preventing luteolysis is crucial to maintain pregnancy.
0042702	name:Name:uterine wall growth	info:Definition:The regrowth of the endometrium and blood vessels in the uterus following menstruation, resulting from a rise in progesterone levels.
0042704	name:Name:uterine wall breakdown	info:Definition:The sloughing of the endometrium and blood vessels during menstruation that results from a drop in progesterone levels.
0060112	name:Name:generation of ovulation cycle rhythm	name:Synonym:generation of estrus cycle rhythm	name:Synonym:generation of menstrual cycle rhythm	name:Synonym:generation of oestrus cycle rhythm	info:Definition:The process which controls the timing of the type of sexual cycle seen in female mammals.
0060206	name:Name:estrous cycle phase	info:Definition:The progression of physiological phases, occurring in the endometrium during the estrous cycle that recur at regular intervals during the reproductive years. The estrous cycle is an ovulation cycle where the endometrium is resorbed if pregnancy does not occur.
0060207	name:Name:diestrus	info:Definition:The estrous cycle phase which is a period of sexual quiescence and represents the phase of the mature corpus luteum.
0060208	name:Name:proestrus	info:Definition:The estrous cycle phase in which there is heightened follicular activity.
0060209	name:Name:estrus	name:Synonym:oestrus	info:Definition:The estrous cycle phase in which a female is sexually receptive.
0060210	name:Name:metestrus	info:Definition:The estrous cycle phase in which there is subsiding follicular function.
0050896	name:Name:response to stimulus	name:Synonym:physiological response to stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus. The process begins with detection of the stimulus and ends with a change in state or activity or the cell or organism.
0006950	name:Name:response to stress	name:Synonym:response to abiotic stress	name:Synonym:response to biotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a disturbance in organismal or cellular homeostasis, usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0001666	name:Name:response to hypoxia	name:Synonym:response to hypoxic stress	name:Synonym:response to lowered oxygen tension	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating lowered oxygen tension. Hypoxia, defined as a decline in O2 levels below normoxic levels of 20.8 - 20.95%, results in metabolic adaptation at both the cellular and organismal level.
0070483	name:Name:detection of hypoxia	name:Synonym:detection of reduced oxygen levels	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus indicating lowered oxygen tension is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal. Hypoxia, defined as a decline in O2 levels below normoxic levels of 20.8 - 20.95%, results in metabolic adaptation at both the cellular and organismal level.
0003299	name:Name:muscle hypertrophy in response to stress	info:Definition:The enlargement or overgrowth of all or part of a muscle organ or tissue due to an increase in the size of its muscle cells as a result of a disturbance in organismal or cellular homeostasis.
0014898	name:Name:cardiac muscle hypertrophy in response to stress	info:Definition:The enlargement or overgrowth of all or part of the heart muscle due to an increase in size (not length) of individual cardiac muscle fibers, without cell division.
0006952	name:Name:defense response	name:Synonym:antimicrobial peptide activity	name:Synonym:defence response	name:Synonym:defense/immunity protein activity	name:Synonym:physiological defense response	info:Definition:Reactions, triggered in response to the presence of a foreign body or the occurrence of an injury, which result in restriction of damage to the organism attacked or prevention/recovery from the infection caused by the attack.
0002209	name:Name:behavioral defense response	name:Synonym:behavioural defense response	info:Definition:A behavioral response seeking to protect an organism from an a perceived external threat to that organism.
0002213	name:Name:defense response to insect	name:Synonym:physiological defense response to insect	info:Definition:A response to protect an organism from a directly detected or perceived external threat from an insect or insects to that organism.
0002215	name:Name:defense response to nematode	name:Synonym:physiological defense response to nematode	info:Definition:A response to protect an organism from a directly detected or perceived external threat from a nematode or nematodes, which results in restriction of damage to the organism attacked or prevention/recovery from the infection caused by the attack.
0002229	name:Name:defense response to oomycetes	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of oomycetes that act to protect the cell or organism.
0002242	name:Name:defense response to parasitic plant	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a parasitic plant that act to protect an organism.
0002357	name:Name:defense response to tumor cell	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a tumor cell that act to protect the cell or organism.
0006954	name:Name:inflammatory response	info:Definition:The immediate defensive reaction (by vertebrate tissue) to infection or injury caused by chemical or physical agents. The process is characterized by local vasodilation, extravasation of plasma into intercellular spaces and accumulation of white blood cells and macrophages.
0006968	name:Name:cellular defense response	name:Synonym:cellular defence response	info:Definition:A defense response that is mediated by cells.
0042742	name:Name:defense response to bacterium	name:Synonym:antibacterial peptide activity	name:Synonym:defence response to bacteria	name:Synonym:defence response to bacterium	name:Synonym:defense response to bacteria	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a bacterium that act to protect the cell or organism.
0042832	name:Name:defense response to protozoan	name:Synonym:defence response to pathogenic protozoa	name:Synonym:defence response to protozoa	name:Synonym:defence response to protozoon	name:Synonym:defense response to pathogenic protozoa	name:Synonym:defense response to protozoa	name:Synonym:defense response to protozoon	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a protozoan that act to protect the cell or organism.
0050832	name:Name:defense response to fungus	name:Synonym:defence response to fungi	name:Synonym:defence response to fungus	name:Synonym:defense response to fungi	info:Definition:Reactions triggered in response to the presence of a fungus that act to protect the cell or organism.
0051807	name:Name:evasion or tolerance of defense response of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:evasion of other organism defence response	name:Synonym:evasion or tolerance of defense response of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process, either active or passive, by which an organism avoids or tolerates the effects of a second organism's defense response; the defense response is mounted by the second organism in response to the presence of the first organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052542	name:Name:defense response by callose deposition	name:Synonym:callose deposition during defense response	name:Synonym:callose localization during defense response	info:Definition:Any process in which callose is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location during the defense response. Callose is a linear 1,3-beta-d-glucan formed from UDP-glucose and is found in certain plant cell walls.
0006970	name:Name:response to osmotic stress	name:Synonym:osmotic response	name:Synonym:osmotic stress response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of solutes outside the organism or cell.
0006971	name:Name:hypotonic response	name:Synonym:hypo-osmotic response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of detection of, or exposure to, a hypotonic environment, i.e. an environment with a lower concentration of solutes than the organism or cell.
0006972	name:Name:hyperosmotic response	name:Synonym:HOG response	name:Synonym:hypertonic response	name:Synonym:response to hypertonicity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of detection of, or exposure to, a hyperosmotic environment, i.e. an environment with a higher concentration of solutes than the organism or cell.
0009651	name:Name:response to salt stress	name:Synonym:response to ionic osmotic stress	name:Synonym:salinity response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of salt (particularly but not exclusively sodium and chloride ions) in the environment.
0010335	name:Name:response to non-ionic osmotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of non-ionic solutes (e.g. mannitol, sorbitol) in the environment.
0043557	name:Name:regulation of translation in response to osmotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the frequency, rate or extent of translation as a result of a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of solutes outside the organism or cell.
0043575	name:Name:detection of osmotic stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus indicating an increase or decrease in the concentration of solutes outside the organism or cell is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0006979	name:Name:response to oxidative stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of oxidative stress, a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of reactive oxygen species, e.g. superoxide anions, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals.
0000302	name:Name:response to reactive oxygen species	name:Synonym:response to active oxygen species	name:Synonym:response to AOS	name:Synonym:response to reactive oxidative species	name:Synonym:response to reactive oxygen intermediate	name:Synonym:response to ROI	name:Synonym:response to ROS	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a reactive oxygen species stimulus. Reactive oxygen species include singlet oxygen, superoxide, and oxygen free radicals.
0001306	name:Name:age-dependent response to oxidative stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of oxidative stress, a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of reactive oxygen species, where the change varies according to the age of the cell or organism.
0033194	name:Name:response to hydroperoxide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a hydroperoxide stimulus. Hydroperoxides are monosubstitution products of hydrogen peroxide, HOOH.
0070994	name:Name:detection of oxidative stress	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus indicating oxidative stress is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0006991	name:Name:response to sterol depletion	name:Synonym:sterol depletion response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating deprivation of sterols. Sterols are a group of steroids characterized by the presence of one or more hydroxyl groups and a hydrocarbon side-chain in the molecule.
0009271	name:Name:phage shock	info:Definition:A response by bacterial cells to a variety of stresses including filamentous phage infection, mislocalization of envelope proteins, extremes of temperature, osmolarity or ethanol concentration, and the presence of proton ionophores such as carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), that involves expression of the phage shock protein operon, and acts to protect the bacterial cells from damage.
0009408	name:Name:response to heat	name:Synonym:response to heat shock	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a heat stimulus, a temperature stimulus above the optimal temperature for that organism.
0010286	name:Name:heat acclimation	info:Definition:Any process that increases heat tolerance of an organism in response to high temperatures.
0009409	name:Name:response to cold	name:Synonym:freezing tolerance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cold stimulus, a temperature stimulus below the optimal temperature for that organism.
0009631	name:Name:cold acclimation	info:Definition:Any process that increases freezing tolerance of an organism in response to low, nonfreezing temperatures.
0010048	name:Name:vernalization response	info:Definition:The process of thermal induction in plants in which flowering is promoted by exposure to low temperatures.
0050826	name:Name:response to freezing	name:Synonym:antifreeze activity	name:Synonym:ice nucleation inhibitor activity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a freezing stimulus, temperatures below 0 degrees Celsius.
0009413	name:Name:response to flooding	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating flooding, short-term immersion in water.
0009414	name:Name:response to water deprivation	name:Synonym:drought tolerance	name:Synonym:response to dehydration	name:Synonym:response to drought	name:Synonym:response to thirst	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a water deprivation stimulus, prolonged deprivation of water.
0009269	name:Name:response to desiccation	name:Synonym:desiccation tolerance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a desiccation stimulus, extreme dryness resulting from the prolonged deprivation of water.
0009819	name:Name:drought recovery	name:Synonym:drought tolerance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of prolonged deprivation of water that restores that organism to a normal (non-stressed) condition.
0042630	name:Name:behavioral response to water deprivation	name:Synonym:behavioral response to drought	name:Synonym:behavioral response to thirst	name:Synonym:behavioural response to water deprivation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of deprivation of water.
0009611	name:Name:response to wounding	name:Synonym:physiological response to wounding	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating damage to the organism.
0002210	name:Name:behavioral response to wounding	name:Synonym:behavioural response to wounding	info:Definition:A behavioral response resulting from wounding.
0009861	name:Name:jasmonic acid and ethylene-dependent systemic resistance	name:Synonym:jasmonic acid and ethene-dependent systemic resistance	name:Synonym:jasmonic acid/ethylene-dependent systemic resistance	info:Definition:The jasmonic acid and ethylene (ethene) dependent process that confers broad spectrum systemic resistance to disease in response to wounding or a pathogen.
0014822	name:Name:detection of wounding	name:Synonym:detection of injury	info:Definition:The series of events by which an injury stimulus is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0014876	name:Name:response to injury involved in regulation of muscle adaptation	name:Synonym:response to injury involved in regulation of muscle plasticity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a injury. This process occurs as part of the regulation of muscle adaptation.
0042060	name:Name:wound healing	info:Definition:The series of events that restore integrity to a damaged tissue, following an injury.
0048678	name:Name:response to axon injury	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an axon injury stimulus.
0009635	name:Name:response to herbicide	name:Synonym:herbicide susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a herbicide stimulus. Herbicides are chemicals used to kill or control the growth of plants.
0034059	name:Name:response to anoxia	name:Synonym:response to anoxic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating a decline in oxygen levels to trace amounts, <0.1%.
0034405	name:Name:response to fluid shear stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a fluid shear stress stimulus. Fluid shear stress is the force acting on an object in a system where the fluid is moving across a solid surface.
0034616	name:Name:response to laminar fluid shear stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a laminar fluid shear stress stimulus. Laminar fluid flow is the force acting on an object in a system where the fluid is moving across a solid surface in parallel layers. As an example, laminar shear stress can be seen where blood flows against the luminal side of blood vessel walls.
0035900	name:Name:response to isolation stress	name:Synonym:response to social isolation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lack of contact with other members of the same species.
0035902	name:Name:response to immobilization stress	name:Synonym:response to immobilisation stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of being rendered immobile.
0035966	name:Name:response to topologically incorrect protein	name:Synonym:response to misfolded or unfolded protein	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a protein that is not folded in its correct three-dimensional structure.
0006986	name:Name:response to unfolded protein	name:Synonym:heat shock protein activity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an unfolded protein stimulus.
0051788	name:Name:response to misfolded protein	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a misfolded protein stimulus.
0042594	name:Name:response to starvation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a starvation stimulus, deprivation of nourishment.
0042595	name:Name:behavioral response to starvation	name:Synonym:behavioural response to starvation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of deprivation of nourishment.
0055084	name:Name:fruiting body development in response to starvation	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the fruiting body over time, from its formation to the mature structure. The process begins with a response to a lack of nutrients and ends when the fruiting body is a mature structure.
0060275	name:Name:maintenance of stationary phase in response to starvation	info:Definition:The homeostatic process in which a population of cells changes its metabolic activity resulting in the rate of death in the population equaling the rate of reproduction in response to limited nutrients in the environment.
0051409	name:Name:response to nitrosative stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitrosative stress stimulus. Nitrosative stress is a state often resulting from exposure to high levels of nitric oxide (NO) or the highly reactive oxidant peroxynitrite, which is produced following interaction of NO with superoxide anions.
0051599	name:Name:response to hydrostatic pressure	name:Synonym:response to biomechanical stress	name:Synonym:response to static fluid pressure	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a hydrostatic pressure stimulus. Hydrostatic pressure is the force acting on an object in a system where the fluid is at rest (as opposed to moving). The weight of the fluid above the object creates pressure on it.
0055093	name:Name:response to hyperoxia	name:Synonym:response to hyperoxic stress	name:Synonym:response to increased oxygen tension	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating increased oxygen tension.
0007610	name:Name:behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to stimulus	name:Synonym:behaviour	name:Synonym:behavioural response to stimulus	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism in response to external or internal stimuli. Patterned activity of a whole organism in a manner dependent upon some combination of that organism's internal state and external conditions.
0007611	name:Name:learning or memory	info:Definition:The acquisition and processing of information and/or the storage and retrieval of this information over time.
0007612	name:Name:learning	info:Definition:Any process in an organism in which a relatively long-lasting adaptive behavioral change occurs as the result of experience.
0007613	name:Name:memory	info:Definition:The activities involved in the mental information processing system that receives (registers), modifies, stores, and retrieves informational stimuli. The main stages involved in the formation and retrieval of memory are encoding (processing of received information by acquisition), storage (building a permanent record of received information as a result of consolidation) and retrieval (calling back the stored information and use it in a suitable way to execute a given task).
0007625	name:Name:grooming behavior	name:Synonym:grooming behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism relating to grooming, cleaning and brushing to remove dirt and parasites.
0007626	name:Name:locomotory behavior	name:Synonym:behavior via locomotion	name:Synonym:locomotion in response to stimulus	name:Synonym:locomotory behavioral response to stimulus	name:Synonym:locomotory behaviour	name:Synonym:locomotory behavioural response to stimulus	info:Definition:The specific movement from place to place of an organism in response to external or internal stimuli. Locomotion of a whole organism in a manner dependent upon some combination of that organism's internal state and external conditions.
0035178	name:Name:turning behavior	name:Synonym:turning behaviour	info:Definition:Fine-tuning the spatial position of an organism in response to variability in their environment. For example, reorientation of an organism in the direction of a food source.
0035641	name:Name:locomotory exploration behavior	info:Definition:The specific movement from place to place of an organism in response to a novel environment.
0007631	name:Name:feeding behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to food	name:Synonym:behavioural response to food	name:Synonym:drinking	name:Synonym:eating	name:Synonym:feeding behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior associated with the intake of food.
0001661	name:Name:conditioned taste aversion	info:Definition:A conditioned aversion to a specific chemical compound as a result of that compound being coupled with a noxious stimulus.
0001967	name:Name:suckling behavior	name:Synonym:nursing behavior	info:Definition:Specific actions of a newborn or infant mammal that result in the derivation of nourishment from the breast.
0035199	name:Name:salt aversion	name:Synonym:behavioral response to salt	info:Definition:The specific avoidance actions or reactions of an organism in response to the perception of salt.
0042755	name:Name:eating behavior	name:Synonym:eating behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism relating to the intake of food, any substance (usually solid) that can be metabolized by an organism to give energy and build tissue.
0042756	name:Name:drinking behavior	name:Synonym:drinking behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism relating to the intake of liquids, especially water.
0051816	name:Name:acquisition of nutrients from other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The production of structures and/or molecules in an organism that are required for the acquisition and/or utilization of nutrients obtained from a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0007635	name:Name:chemosensory behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:behavioural response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:chemosensory behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior that is dependent upon the sensation of chemicals.
0007636	name:Name:chemosensory jump behavior	name:Synonym:chemosensory jump behaviour	name:Synonym:jump response to chemical stimulus	info:Definition:The sudden, usually upward, movement off the ground or other surface through sudden muscular effort in the legs, following exposure to a chemical substance.
0007637	name:Name:proboscis extension reflex	name:Synonym:behavioral response to sugar stimulus, proboscis extension	name:Synonym:proboscis extension in response to sugar stimulus	info:Definition:The extension, through direct muscle actions, of the proboscis (the trunk-like extension of the mouthparts on the adult external head) in response to a sugar stimulus.
0042048	name:Name:olfactory behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to scent	name:Synonym:behavioral response to smell	name:Synonym:behavioural response to odour	name:Synonym:behavioural response to scent	name:Synonym:behavioural response to smell	name:Synonym:olfactory behaviour	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an organism in response to an odor.
0061366	name:Name:behavioral response to chemical pain	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behaviour of an organism as a result of a chemical pain stimulus.
0007638	name:Name:mechanosensory behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:behavioural response to mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:mechanosensory behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior that is dependent upon the sensation of a mechanical stimulus.
0031223	name:Name:auditory behavior	name:Synonym:auditory behaviour	name:Synonym:behavioral response to sound	name:Synonym:behavioural response to sound	info:Definition:The actions or reactions of an organism in response to a sound.
0032537	name:Name:host-seeking behavior	name:Synonym:host-seeking behaviour	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism that are associated with finding a host organism; may include behavioral responses to light, temperature, or chemical emanations from the prospective host.
0035640	name:Name:exploration behavior	name:Synonym:exploration behaviour	name:Synonym:exploratory behavior	name:Synonym:exploratory behaviour	name:Synonym:open-field behavior	info:Definition:The specific actions or reactions of an organism in response to a novel environment or stimulus.
0040040	name:Name:thermosensory behavior	name:Synonym:behavioral response to temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:behavioural response to temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:thermosensory behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior that is dependent upon the sensation of temperature.
0051705	name:Name:behavioral interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:behavioral interaction with other organism	name:Synonym:behavioral signaling	name:Synonym:behavioral signalling	name:Synonym:behavioural interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:behavioural interaction with other organism	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism has a behavioral effect on another organism of the same or different species.
0002118	name:Name:aggressive behavior	name:Synonym:aggression	info:Definition:A behavioral interaction between organisms in which one organism has the intention of inflicting physical damage on another individual.
0035176	name:Name:social behavior	name:Synonym:cooperative behavior	name:Synonym:social behaviour	info:Definition:Behavior that occurs predominantly, or only, in individuals that are part of a group.
0035737	name:Name:injection of substance in to other organism	info:Definition:The process of forcing a substance into another organism, either by penetrating the skin of the other organism or by applying the substance externally to a sensitive tissue such as those that surround the eyes.
0051867	name:Name:general adaptation syndrome, behavioral process	name:Synonym:behavioral process during general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:behavioral response during general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:behavioural process during general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:behavioural response during general adaptation syndrome	name:Synonym:general adaptation syndrome, behavioral response	name:Synonym:general adaptation syndrome, behavioural process	name:Synonym:general adaptation syndrome, behavioural response	info:Definition:The set of behavioral processes that occur as part of the general adaptation syndrome, the response of the body to a strong, stressful stimulus.
0060273	name:Name:crying behavior	info:Definition:The behavior in which an organism sheds tears, often accompanied by non-verbal vocalizations and in response to external or internal stimuli.
0060756	name:Name:foraging behavior	info:Definition:Behavior by which an organism locates food.
0060757	name:Name:adult foraging behavior	info:Definition:Behavior by which an adult locates food.
0060758	name:Name:foraging behavior by probing substrate	info:Definition:Foraging behavior in which an anatomical part of the organism is inserted into the substrate to locate food.
0071625	name:Name:vocalization behavior	name:Synonym:vocalisation behaviour	info:Definition:The behavior in which an organism produces sounds by a mechanism involving its respiratory system.
0009605	name:Name:response to external stimulus	name:Synonym:response to environmental stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an external stimulus.
0001964	name:Name:startle response	info:Definition:An action or movement due to the application of a sudden unexpected stimulus.
0009581	name:Name:detection of external stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of external stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which an external stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0001563	name:Name:detection of protozoan	name:Synonym:detection of protozoa	name:Synonym:detection of protozoon	name:Synonym:perception of protozoa	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a protozoan is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0002231	name:Name:detection of oomycetes	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from an oomycetes is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0009583	name:Name:detection of light stimulus	name:Synonym:detection of light	name:Synonym:perception of light	info:Definition:The series of events in which a light stimulus (in the form of photons) is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0009590	name:Name:detection of gravity	name:Synonym:perception of gravity	info:Definition:The series of events in which a gravitational stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009600	name:Name:detection of nematode	name:Synonym:perception of nematode	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a nematode is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0009601	name:Name:detection of insect	name:Synonym:perception of insect	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from an insect is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0009602	name:Name:detection of symbiont	name:Synonym:perception of symbiont	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a symbiont (an organism living in close physical association with an organism of a different species) is received and converted into a molecular signal. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0016045	name:Name:detection of bacterium	name:Synonym:detection of bacteria	name:Synonym:perception of bacteria	name:Synonym:perception of bacterium	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a bacterium is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0016046	name:Name:detection of fungus	name:Synonym:detection of fungi	name:Synonym:perception of fungi	name:Synonym:perception of fungus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a fungus is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0016048	name:Name:detection of temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:detection of temperature	name:Synonym:detection of thermal stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of temperature	info:Definition:The series of events in which a temperature stimulus (hot or cold) is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0050982	name:Name:detection of mechanical stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events by which a mechanical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009612	name:Name:response to mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:chemi-mechanical coupling	name:Synonym:mechanical stimulus response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a mechanical stimulus.
0010996	name:Name:response to auditory stimulus	name:Synonym:response to sound	name:Synonym:response to sound stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an auditory stimulus.
0009649	name:Name:entrainment of circadian clock	name:Synonym:regulation of circadian rhythm phase	info:Definition:The synchronization of a circadian rhythm to environmental time cues such as light.
0043153	name:Name:entrainment of circadian clock by photoperiod	name:Synonym:photoentrainment of circadian clock	info:Definition:The synchronization of a circadian rhythm to photoperiod, the intermittent cycle of light (day) and dark (night).
0009991	name:Name:response to extracellular stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an extracellular stimulus.
0031667	name:Name:response to nutrient levels	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus reflecting the presence, absence, or concentration of nutrients.
0042465	name:Name:kinesis	info:Definition:The movement of a cell or organism in response to a stimulus in which the rate of movement depends on the intensity (rather than the direction) of the stimulus.
0042466	name:Name:chemokinesis	info:Definition:A response by a motile cell to a soluble chemical that involves an increase or decrease in speed (positive or negative orthokinesis) or of frequency of movement or a change in the frequency or magnitude of turning behavior (klinokinesis).
0042467	name:Name:orthokinesis	info:Definition:The movement of a cell or organism in response to a stimulus in which the speed or frequency of movement is increased or decreased.
0042468	name:Name:klinokinesis	info:Definition:The movement of a cell or organism in response to a stimulus in which the frequency or magnitude of turning behavior is altered.
0043207	name:Name:response to external biotic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an external biotic stimulus, an external stimulus caused by, or produced by living things.
0060004	name:Name:reflex	info:Definition:An automatic response to a stimulus beginning with a nerve impulse from a receptor and ending with the action of an effector such as a gland or a muscle. Signaling never reaches a level of consciousness.
0060005	name:Name:vestibular reflex	info:Definition:A reflex process in which a response to an angular or linear acceleration stimulus begins with an afferent nerve impulse from a receptor in the inner ear and ends with the compensatory action of eye muscles. Signaling never reaches a level of consciousness.
0060013	name:Name:righting reflex	name:Synonym:righting response	info:Definition:A reflex process in which an animal immediately tries to turn over after being placed in a supine position.
0060082	name:Name:eye blink reflex	name:Synonym:nictitating membrane reflex	info:Definition:The reflex process in which a mechanical stimulus applied to the eye elicits a response of the eyelid closing.
0060156	name:Name:milk ejection	info:Definition:An automatic response to suckling, beginning with a nerve impulse from a receptor in the mammary gland and ending with the ejection of milk from the gland. Signaling never reaches a level of consciousness.
0071496	name:Name:cellular response to external stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to environmental stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an external stimulus.
0009607	name:Name:response to biotic stimulus	name:Synonym:response to biotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a biotic stimulus, a stimulus caused or produced by a living organism.
0002237	name:Name:response to molecule of bacterial origin	name:Synonym:response to bacteria associated molecule	name:Synonym:response to bacterial associated molecule	name:Synonym:response to bacterium associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of bacterial origin such as peptides derived from bacterial flagellin.
0032490	name:Name:detection of molecule of bacterial origin	name:Synonym:detection of bacteria associated molecule	name:Synonym:detection of bacterial associated molecule	name:Synonym:detection of bacterium associated molecule	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a molecule of bacterial origin is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0032493	name:Name:response to bacterial lipoprotein	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a bacterial lipoprotein stimulus.
0032494	name:Name:response to peptidoglycan	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a peptidoglycan stimulus. Peptidoglycan is a bacterial cell wall macromolecule.
0032496	name:Name:response to lipopolysaccharide	name:Synonym:response to endotoxin	name:Synonym:response to LPS	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lipopolysaccharide stimulus; lipopolysaccharide is a major component of the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria.
0070391	name:Name:response to lipoteichoic acid	name:Synonym:response to LTA	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lipoteichoic acid stimulus; lipoteichoic acid is a major component of the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria and typically consists of a chain of glycerol-phosphate repeating units linked to a glycolipid anchor.
0002238	name:Name:response to molecule of fungal origin	name:Synonym:response to fungus associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of fungal origin such as chito-octamer oligosaccharide.
0032491	name:Name:detection of molecule of fungal origin	name:Synonym:detection of fungal associated molecule	name:Synonym:detection of fungus associated molecule	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a molecule of fungal origin is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0002240	name:Name:response to molecule of oomycetes origin	name:Synonym:response to oomycetes associated molecule	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus by molecules of oomycetes origin.
0032492	name:Name:detection of molecule of oomycetes origin	name:Synonym:detection of oomycetes associated molecule	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a molecule of oomycetes origin is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0002347	name:Name:response to tumor cell	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a tumor cell.
0002355	name:Name:detection of tumor cell	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus from a tumor cell is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0009595	name:Name:detection of biotic stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of biotic stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a biotic stimulus, one caused or produced by a living organism, is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0002234	name:Name:detection of endoplasmic reticulum overloading	name:Synonym:detection of ER overloading	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus generated by the accumulation of normal or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0051824	name:Name:recognition of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:recognition of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The set of specific processes that allow an organism to detect the presence of a second organism via physical or chemical signals, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0060245	name:Name:detection of cell density	info:Definition:The series of events in which information about the density of cells in a population is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0072394	name:Name:detection of stimulus involved in cell cycle checkpoint	name:Synonym:cell cycle checkpoint sensor mechanism	name:Synonym:cell cycle checkpoint sensor process	name:Synonym:sensing involved in cell cycle checkpoint	info:Definition:The series of events in which information about a biological process or quality is received and converted into a molecular signal, contributing to a cell cycle checkpoint.
0051707	name:Name:response to other organism	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from another living organism.
0001562	name:Name:response to protozoan	name:Synonym:resistance to pathogenic protozoa	name:Synonym:response to protozoa	name:Synonym:response to protozoon	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a protozoan.
0002239	name:Name:response to oomycetes	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from an oomycetes.
0009608	name:Name:response to symbiont	name:Synonym:response of host to symbiont	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a symbiont, an organism living with an organism of a different species in close physical association. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0009615	name:Name:response to virus	name:Synonym:response to viruses	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a virus.
0009617	name:Name:response to bacterium	name:Synonym:response to bacteria	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a bacterium.
0009620	name:Name:response to fungus	name:Synonym:response to fungi	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a fungus.
0009624	name:Name:response to nematode	name:Synonym:response to nematodes	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a nematode.
0009625	name:Name:response to insect	name:Synonym:response to insects	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from an insect.
0052173	name:Name:response to defenses of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:response to defenses of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of detecting the defenses of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0075136	name:Name:response to host	name:Synonym:response of symbiont to host	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of the symbiont or its cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of detecting molecules of its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0080027	name:Name:response to herbivore	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus from a herbivore.
0009628	name:Name:response to abiotic stimulus	name:Synonym:response to abiotic stress	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an abiotic (non-living) stimulus.
0009266	name:Name:response to temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:response to thermal stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a temperature stimulus.
0010378	name:Name:temperature compensation of the circadian clock	name:Synonym:regulation of the circadian clock by temperature	info:Definition:The process in which the circadian clock maintains robust and accurate timing over a broad range of physiological temperatures. The circadian clock is an endogenous 24-h timer found in most eukaryotes and in photosynthetic bacteria. The clock drives rhythms in the physiology, biochemistry, and metabolism of the organisms.
0071502	name:Name:cellular response to temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to thermal stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a temperature stimulus.
0009268	name:Name:response to pH	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pH stimulus.
0010446	name:Name:response to alkalinity	name:Synonym:response to alkaline pH	name:Synonym:response to basic pH	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pH stimulus with pH > 7.
0010447	name:Name:response to acidity	name:Synonym:response to acidic pH	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pH stimulus with pH < 7.
0009314	name:Name:response to radiation	name:Synonym:response to electromagnetic radiation stimulus	name:Synonym:response to radiation stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an electromagnetic radiation stimulus. Electromagnetic radiation is a propagating wave in space with electric and magnetic components. These components oscillate at right angles to each other and to the direction of propagation.
0009416	name:Name:response to light stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a light stimulus, electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths classified as infrared, visible or ultraviolet light.
0010212	name:Name:response to ionizing radiation	name:Synonym:response to ionising radiation	name:Synonym:response to ionizing radiation stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a ionizing radiation stimulus. Ionizing radiation is radiation with sufficient energy to remove electrons from atoms and may arise from spontaneous decay of unstable isotopes, resulting in alpha and beta particles and gamma rays. Ionizing radiation also includes X-rays.
0009415	name:Name:response to water	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a water stimulus.
0009270	name:Name:response to humidity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a humidity stimulus, moisture in the atmosphere.
0030912	name:Name:response to deep water	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a deep water stimulus, being immersed in standing deep water throughout the life cycle.
0009582	name:Name:detection of abiotic stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of abiotic stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which an (non-living) abiotic stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050981	name:Name:detection of electrical stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events by which an electrical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009629	name:Name:response to gravity	name:Synonym:response to gravitational stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a gravitational stimulus.
0051602	name:Name:response to electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:response to electricity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an electrical stimulus.
0014878	name:Name:response to electrical stimulus involved in regulation of muscle adaptation	name:Synonym:response to electrical stimulus involved in regulation of muscle plasticity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an electrical stimulus. This process occurs as part of the regulation of muscle adaptation.
0071000	name:Name:response to magnetism	name:Synonym:response to magnetic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a magnetic stimulus.
0080167	name:Name:response to karrikin	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a karrikin stimulus. Karrikins are signaling molecules in smoke from burning vegetation that trigger seed germination for many angiosperms (flowering plants).
0009719	name:Name:response to endogenous stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus arising within the organism.
0009725	name:Name:response to hormone stimulus	name:Synonym:growth regulator	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a hormone stimulus.
0009720	name:Name:detection of hormone stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of hormone stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a hormone stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009723	name:Name:response to ethylene stimulus	name:Synonym:response to ethene stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an ethylene (ethene) stimulus.
0009733	name:Name:response to auxin stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an auxin stimulus.
0009735	name:Name:response to cytokinin stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cytokinin stimulus.
0009737	name:Name:response to abscisic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an abscisic acid stimulus.
0009739	name:Name:response to gibberellin stimulus	name:Synonym:response to gibberellic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a gibberellin stimulus.
0009741	name:Name:response to brassinosteroid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a brassinosteroid stimulus.
0032870	name:Name:cellular response to hormone stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a hormone stimulus.
0034694	name:Name:response to prostaglandin stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a prostagladin stimulus.
0034698	name:Name:response to gonadotropin stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a gonadotropin stimulus.
0043434	name:Name:response to peptide hormone stimulus	name:Synonym:response to polypeptide hormone stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a peptide hormone stimulus. A peptide hormone is any of a class of peptides that are secreted into the blood stream and have endocrine functions in living animals.
0044321	name:Name:response to leptin stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a leptin stimulus. Leptin is a hormone manufactured primarily in the adipocytes of white adipose tissue, and the level of circulating leptin is directly proportional to the total amount of fat in the body. It plays a key role in regulating energy intake and energy expenditure, including appetite and metabolism].
0048545	name:Name:response to steroid hormone stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a steroid hormone stimulus.
0071107	name:Name:response to parathyroid hormone stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a parathyroid hormone stimulus.
0097066	name:Name:response to thyroid hormone stimulus	info:Definition:A change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a thyroid hormone stimulus.
0009726	name:Name:detection of endogenous stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of endogenous stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which an endogenous stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0003127	name:Name:detection of nodal flow	info:Definition:The series of events by which an endogenous stimulus is received by a cilium on a cell and converted to a molecular signal contributing to left/right asymmetry.
0009754	name:Name:detection of jasmonic acid stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of jasmonic acid stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a jasmonic acid stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal. Series of events required for a jasmonic acid stimulus to be detected and converted to a signal molecule.
0016475	name:Name:detection of nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio	name:Synonym:interpretation of nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio	name:Synonym:sensing of nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio	info:Definition:The process in which the size of the nucleus with respect to its cytoplasm is sensed by a cell.
0009753	name:Name:response to jasmonic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a jasmonic acid stimulus.
0032260	name:Name:response to jasmonic acid stimulus involved in jasmonic acid and ethylene-dependent systemic resistance	name:Synonym:response to jasmonic acid stimulus during jasmonic acid and ethylene-dependent systemic resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a jasmonic acid stimulus received in the context of the jasmonic acid- and ethylene (ethene)-dependent process that confers broad spectrum systemic resistance to disease in response to wounding or a pathogen.
0071395	name:Name:cellular response to jasmonic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a jasmonic acid stimulus.
0010243	name:Name:response to organic nitrogen	name:Synonym:response to organonitrogen compound	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an organic nitrogen stimulus. An organic nitrogen compound is formally a compound containing at least one carbon-nitrogen bond.
0014075	name:Name:response to amine stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an amine stimulus. An amine is a compound formally derived from ammonia by replacing one, two or three hydrogen atoms by hydrocarbyl groups.
0071417	name:Name:cellular response to organic nitrogen	name:Synonym:cellular response to organonitrogen compound	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an organic nitrogen stimulus. An organic nitrogen compound is formally a compound containing at least one carbon-nitrogen bond.
0055094	name:Name:response to lipoprotein stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lipoprotein stimulus.
0055098	name:Name:response to low-density lipoprotein particle stimulus	name:Synonym:response to low-density lipoprotein particle stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a low-density lipoprotein particle stimulus.
0055099	name:Name:response to high density lipoprotein particle stimulus	name:Synonym:response to high density lipoprotein particle stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a high density lipoprotein particle stimulus.
0071402	name:Name:cellular response to lipoprotein particle stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lipoprotein particle stimulus.
0070849	name:Name:response to epidermal growth factor stimulus	name:Synonym:response to EGF stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an epidermal growth factor stimulus.
0071364	name:Name:cellular response to epidermal growth factor stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to EGF stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an epidermal growth factor stimulus.
0071495	name:Name:cellular response to endogenous stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus arising within the organism.
0071560	name:Name:cellular response to transforming growth factor beta stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to TGF-beta stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to TGFbeta stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a transforming growth factor beta stimulus.
0071773	name:Name:cellular response to BMP stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to bone morphogenetic protein stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) stimulus.
0071559	name:Name:response to transforming growth factor beta stimulus	name:Synonym:response to TGF-beta stimulus	name:Synonym:response to TGFbeta stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a transforming growth factor beta stimulus.
0071772	name:Name:response to BMP stimulus	name:Synonym:response to bone morphogenetic protein stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) stimulus.
0071774	name:Name:response to fibroblast growth factor stimulus	name:Synonym:response to FGF stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a fibroblast growth factor stimulus.
0044344	name:Name:cellular response to fibroblast growth factor stimulus	name:Synonym:cellular response to FGF stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an fibroblast growth factor stimulus.
0014823	name:Name:response to activity	name:Synonym:response to exercise	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an activity stimulus.
0014850	name:Name:response to muscle activity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a muscle activity stimulus.
0014864	name:Name:detection of muscle activity	info:Definition:The series of events in which a muscle activity stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0014873	name:Name:response to muscle activity involved in regulation of muscle adaptation	name:Synonym:response to fatigue	name:Synonym:response to muscle activity involved in regulation of muscle plasticity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a muscle activity stimulus. This process occurs as part of the regulation of muscle adaptation.
0014865	name:Name:detection of activity	info:Definition:The series of events in which an activity stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0014854	name:Name:response to inactivity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an inactivity stimulus.
0014863	name:Name:detection of inactivity	info:Definition:The series of events in which a inactivity stimulus is received by a cell or organism and converted into a molecular signal.
0014869	name:Name:detection of muscle inactivity	info:Definition:The series of events in which a muscle inactivity stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0014870	name:Name:response to muscle inactivity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a muscle inactivity stimulus.
0014877	name:Name:response to muscle inactivity involved in regulation of muscle adaptation	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a muscle inactivity stimulus. This process occurs as part of the regulation of muscle adaptation.
0014874	name:Name:response to stimulus involved in regulation of muscle adaptation	name:Synonym:response to stimulus involved in regulation of muscle plasticity	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus. This occurs as part of the regulation of muscle adaptation.
0042221	name:Name:response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:response to chemical substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a chemical stimulus.
0001101	name:Name:response to acid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an acid stimulus.
0043200	name:Name:response to amino acid stimulus	name:Synonym:response to amino acid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an amino acid stimulus. An amino acid is a carboxylic acids containing one or more amino groups.
0051593	name:Name:response to folic acid	name:Synonym:cellular response to folate	name:Synonym:cellular response to vitamin B9	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a folic acid stimulus.
0007584	name:Name:response to nutrient	name:Synonym:nutritional response pathway	name:Synonym:response to nutrients	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nutrient stimulus.
0009594	name:Name:detection of nutrient	name:Synonym:detection of nutrients	name:Synonym:nutrient sensing	name:Synonym:perception of nutrients	info:Definition:The series of events in which a nutrient stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0033273	name:Name:response to vitamin	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a vitamin stimulus.
0051780	name:Name:behavioral response to nutrient	name:Synonym:behavioural response to nutrient	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in the behavior of an organism as a result of a nutrient stimulus.
0009410	name:Name:response to xenobiotic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a xenobiotic compound stimulus. Xenobiotic compounds are compounds foreign to living organisms.
0009593	name:Name:detection of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:chemoperception	name:Synonym:detection of chemical substance	name:Synonym:perception of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of chemical substance	info:Definition:The series of events in which a chemical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0002235	name:Name:detection of unfolded protein	info:Definition:The series of events in which an unfolded protein stimulus is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0002236	name:Name:detection of misfolded protein	info:Definition:The series of events in which a misfolded protein stimulus is received and converted into a molecular signal.
0003030	name:Name:detection of hydrogen ion	info:Definition:The series of events in which a hydrogen ion stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0003031	name:Name:detection of carbon dioxide	info:Definition:The series of events in which a carbon dioxide stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0003032	name:Name:detection of oxygen	info:Definition:The series of events in which an oxygen stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0005513	name:Name:detection of calcium ion	name:Synonym:Ca2+ ion detection	name:Synonym:calcium ion detection	name:Synonym:calcium ion sensing	name:Synonym:detection of Ca2+ ion	info:Definition:The series of events in which a calcium ion stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009730	name:Name:detection of carbohydrate stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of carbohydrate stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a carbohydrate stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009752	name:Name:detection of salicylic acid stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of salicylic acid stimulus	info:Definition:The series of events in which a salicylic acid stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009995	name:Name:soluble molecule recognition	info:Definition:The recognition of soluble molecules in the environment.
0010108	name:Name:detection of glutamine	name:Synonym:glutamine detection	name:Synonym:glutamine perception	name:Synonym:glutamine sensing	info:Definition:The series of events in which a glutamine stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0010247	name:Name:detection of phosphate ion	name:Synonym:phosphate ion detection	name:Synonym:phosphate ion perception	name:Synonym:phosphate ion sensing	info:Definition:The series of events in which a phosphate ion stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0031319	name:Name:detection of cAMP	name:Synonym:3',5'-cAMP detection	name:Synonym:3',5'-cAMP sensing	name:Synonym:cAMP detection	name:Synonym:cAMP sensing	name:Synonym:cyclic AMP detection	name:Synonym:detection of 3',5' cAMP	name:Synonym:detection of 3',5'-cAMP	name:Synonym:detection of adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate	name:Synonym:detection of cyclic AMP	info:Definition:The series of events in which a cAMP (cyclic AMP, adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate) stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal; cAMP is the nucleotide cyclic AMP.
0043695	name:Name:detection of pheromone	info:Definition:The series of events in which a pheromone stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050907	name:Name:detection of chemical stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of chemical stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of chemical stimulus during sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events in which a sensory chemical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0051776	name:Name:detection of redox state	name:Synonym:redox sensing	info:Definition:The series of events in which a chemical stimulus indicating redox state is received and converted into a molecular signal. Redox state refers to the balance of oxidized versus reduced forms of electron donors and acceptors in an organelle, cell or organ; plastoquinone, glutathione (GSH/GSSG), and nicotinamide nucleotides (NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH) are among the most important.
0071703	name:Name:detection of organic substance	info:Definition:The series of events in which an organic substance stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0009636	name:Name:response to toxin	name:Synonym:detoxification response	name:Synonym:toxin resistance	name:Synonym:toxin susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a toxin stimulus.
0010046	name:Name:response to mycotoxin	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a mycotoxin stimulus. A mycotoxin are a toxic chemical substance produced by fungi.
0010127	name:Name:mycothiol-dependent detoxification	name:Synonym:mycothiol-dependent detoxification of alkylating agent	info:Definition:The chemical reactions using mycothiol to convert an alkylating agent to an S-conjugate of mycothiol. The latter is cleaved to release mercapturic acid which is excreted from the cell.
0010188	name:Name:response to microbial phytotoxin	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a microbial phytotoxin stimulus. A microbial phytotoxin is a chemical substance produced by microbes which is toxic to plants.
0010273	name:Name:detoxification of copper ion	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of copper ion. These include transport of copper away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of copper ion.
0010299	name:Name:detoxification of cobalt ion	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of cobalt ion. These include transport of cobalt away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of cobalt ion.
0010312	name:Name:detoxification of zinc ion	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of zinc ion. These include transport of zinc away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of zinc ion.
0017085	name:Name:response to insecticide	name:Synonym:insecticide resistance	name:Synonym:insecticide susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an insecticide stimulus. Insecticides are chemicals used to kill insects.
0050787	name:Name:detoxification of mercury ion	info:Definition:Any process that reduce or remove the toxicity of mercuric ion. These include transport of mercury away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of mercury ion and/or reduction of mercury ion (Hg[II]) to metallic mercury (Hg[0]).
0051595	name:Name:response to methylglyoxal	name:Synonym:response to pyruvaldehyde	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a methylglyoxal stimulus.
0060276	name:Name:maintenance of stationary phase in response to toxin	info:Definition:The homeostatic process in which a population of cells changes its metabolic activity resulting in the rate of death in the population equaling the rate of reproduction in response to a build-up of toxins in the environment.
0060992	name:Name:response to fungicide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a fungicide stimulus. Fungicides are chemicals used to kill fungi.
0071585	name:Name:detoxification of cadmium ion	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of cadmium ion. These may include transport of cadmium away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of cadmium ion.
0071722	name:Name:detoxification of arsenic-containing substance	name:Synonym:detoxification of arsenic	info:Definition:Any process that reduces or removes the toxicity of compounds containing arsenic, including arsenates, arsenites, and arsenides. These include transport of such compounds away from sensitive areas and to compartments or complexes whose purpose is sequestration of arsenic or arsenic-containing compounds.
0010033	name:Name:response to organic substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an organic substance stimulus.
0009743	name:Name:response to carbohydrate stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a carbohydrate stimulus.
0009751	name:Name:response to salicylic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a salicylic acid stimulus.
0010034	name:Name:response to acetate	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an acetate stimulus.
0014070	name:Name:response to organic cyclic compound	name:Synonym:response to organic cyclic substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an organic cyclic compound stimulus.
0019236	name:Name:response to pheromone	name:Synonym:pheromone response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a pheromone stimulus.
0033198	name:Name:response to ATP	name:Synonym:response to adenosine 5'-triphosphate	name:Synonym:response to adenosine triphosphate	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an ATP (adenosine 5'-triphosphate) stimulus.
0033986	name:Name:response to methanol	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a methanol stimulus.
0033993	name:Name:response to lipid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a lipid stimulus.
0034097	name:Name:response to cytokine stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cytokine stimulus.
0035634	name:Name:response to stilbenoid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of exposure to a stilbenoid. Stilbenoids are secondary products of heartwood formation in trees that can act as phytoalexins. Stilbenoids are hydroxylated derivatives of stilbene. They belong to the family of phenylpropanoids and share most of their biosynthesis pathway with chalcones.
0043279	name:Name:response to alkaloid	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an alkaloid stimulus. Alkaloids are a large group of nitrogenous substances found in naturally in plants, many of which have extracts that are pharmacologically active.
0043331	name:Name:response to dsRNA	name:Synonym:response to double-stranded RNA	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a double-stranded RNA stimulus.
0045471	name:Name:response to ethanol	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an ethanol stimulus.
0045472	name:Name:response to ether	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a ether stimulus.
0051591	name:Name:response to cAMP	name:Synonym:response to 3',5' cAMP	name:Synonym:response to 3',5'-cAMP	name:Synonym:response to adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate	name:Synonym:response to cyclic AMP	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cAMP (cyclic AMP, adenosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate) stimulus.
0051597	name:Name:response to methylmercury	name:Synonym:response to CH3-Hg+	name:Synonym:response to MeHg+	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a methylmercury stimulus.
0070305	name:Name:response to cGMP	name:Synonym:response to 3',5' cGMP	name:Synonym:response to 3',5'-cGMP	name:Synonym:response to cyclic GMP	name:Synonym:response to guanosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a cGMP (cyclic GMP, guanosine 3',5'-cyclophosphate) stimulus.
0070848	name:Name:response to growth factor stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a growth factor stimulus.
0071503	name:Name:response to heparin	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a heparin stimulus.
0071680	name:Name:response to indole-3-methanol	name:Synonym:response to indole-3-carbinol	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an indole-3-methanol stimulus.
0080021	name:Name:response to benzoic acid stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a benzoic acid stimulus.
0010035	name:Name:response to inorganic substance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an inorganic substance stimulus.
0010036	name:Name:response to boron-containing substance	name:Synonym:response to boron	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a boron-containing substance stimulus.
0010037	name:Name:response to carbon dioxide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a carbon dioxide (CO2) stimulus.
0010038	name:Name:response to metal ion	name:Synonym:heavy metal sensitivity/resistance	name:Synonym:response to heavy metal	name:Synonym:response to metal	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a metal ion stimulus.
0010157	name:Name:response to chlorate	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a chlorate stimulus.
0010167	name:Name:response to nitrate	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitrate stimulus.
0010477	name:Name:response to sulfur dioxide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a sulfur dioxide (SO2) stimulus.
0034021	name:Name:response to silicon dioxide	name:Synonym:response to silica	name:Synonym:response to silox	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a silicon dioxide stimulus.
0034465	name:Name:response to carbon monoxide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a carbon monoxide (CO) stimulus.
0035713	name:Name:response to nitrogen dioxide	name:Synonym:response to NO2	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitrogen dioxide (NO2) stimulus.
0046685	name:Name:response to arsenic-containing substance	name:Synonym:arsenate sensitivity/resistance	name:Synonym:response to arsenic	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an arsenic stimulus from compounds containing arsenic, including arsenates, arsenites, and arsenides.
0046687	name:Name:response to chromate	name:Synonym:chromate sensitivity/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a chromate stimulus.
0060359	name:Name:response to ammonium ion	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an ammonium ion stimulus.
0071731	name:Name:response to nitric oxide	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitric oxide stimulus.
0080033	name:Name:response to nitrite	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a nitrate stimulus.
0010193	name:Name:response to ozone	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a ozone stimulus.
0010689	name:Name:negative regulation of ribosomal protein gene transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter in response to chemical stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the frequency, rate or extent of the synthesis of RNA from ribosomal protein genes by RNA polymerase II, originating at an RNA polymerase II promoter, as a result of a chemical stimulus.
0031557	name:Name:induction of programmed cell death in response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:induction of programmed cell death in response to chemical substance	info:Definition:A process which directly activates any of the steps required for programmed cell death as a result of a chemical stimulus.
0031558	name:Name:induction of apoptosis in response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:induction of apoptosis in response to chemical substance	info:Definition:Any process that directly activates any of the steps required for cell death by apoptosis as a result of a chemical stimulus.
0032094	name:Name:response to food	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a food stimulus; food is anything which, when taken into the body, serves to nourish or build up the tissues or to supply body heat.
0042493	name:Name:response to drug	name:Synonym:drug resistance	name:Synonym:drug susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a drug stimulus. A drug is a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease.
0046677	name:Name:response to antibiotic	name:Synonym:antibiotic susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an antibiotic stimulus. An antibiotic is a chemical substance produced by a microorganism which has the capacity to inhibit the growth of or to kill other microorganisms.
0031001	name:Name:response to brefeldin A	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a brefeldin A stimulus.
0046678	name:Name:response to bacteriocin	name:Synonym:bacteriocin susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a bacteriocin stimulus. A bacteriocin is a protein substance released by certain bacteria that kills but does not lyse closely related strains of bacteria. Specific bacteriocins attach to specific receptors on cell walls and induce specific metabolic block, e.g. cessation of nucleic acid or protein synthesis of oxidative phosphorylation.
0046679	name:Name:response to streptomycin	name:Synonym:streptomycin susceptibility/resistance	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a streptomycin stimulus. Streptomycin is a commonly used antibiotic in cell culture media which acts only on prokaryotes and blocks transition from initiation complex to chain elongating ribosome.
0051775	name:Name:response to redox state	name:Synonym:redox signal response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating redox state. Redox state refers to the balance of oxidized versus reduced forms of electron donors and acceptors in an organelle, cell or organ; plastoquinone, glutathione (GSH/GSSG), and nicotinamide nucleotides (NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH) are among the most important.
0071461	name:Name:cellular response to redox state	name:Synonym:cellular redox signal response	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating redox state. Redox state refers to the balance of oxidized versus reduced forms of electron donors and acceptors in an organelle, cell or organ; plastoquinone, glutathione (GSH/GSSG), and nicotinamide nucleotides (NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH) are among the most important.
0051913	name:Name:regulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:regulation of synaptic plasticity by drug	info:Definition:The process in which a chemical substance modulates synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require.
0051914	name:Name:positive regulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:activation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:positive regulation of synaptic plasticity by drug	name:Synonym:stimulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:up regulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:up-regulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	name:Synonym:upregulation of synaptic plasticity by chemical substance	info:Definition:The process in which a chemical substance increases synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require.
0070482	name:Name:response to oxygen levels	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus reflecting the presence, absence, or concentration of oxygen.
0072347	name:Name:response to anesthetic	name:Synonym:response to anaesthetic	info:Definition:Any process that results in a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of an anesthetic stimulus. An anesthetic is a substance that causes loss of feeling, awareness, or sensation.
0051606	name:Name:detection of stimulus	name:Synonym:perception of stimulus	name:Synonym:stimulus detection	name:Synonym:stimulus sensing	info:Definition:The series of events in which a stimulus is received by a cell or organism and converted into a molecular signal.
0042769	name:Name:DNA damage response, detection of DNA damage	name:Synonym:detection of DNA damage during DNA damage response	name:Synonym:DNA damage response, perception of DNA damage	info:Definition:The series of events required to receive a stimulus indicating DNA damage has occurred and convert it to a molecular signal.
0072421	name:Name:detection of DNA damage stimulus involved in DNA damage checkpoint	name:Synonym:DNA damage checkpoint sensor mechanism	name:Synonym:DNA damage checkpoint sensor process	name:Synonym:sensing involved in DNA damage checkpoint	info:Definition:The series of events in which information about damage to DNA is received and converted into a molecular signal, contributing to a DNA damage checkpoint.
0072436	name:Name:detection of stimulus involved in DNA replication checkpoint	name:Synonym:DNA replication checkpoint sensor mechanism	name:Synonym:DNA replication checkpoint sensor process	name:Synonym:sensing involved in DNA replication checkpoint	info:Definition:The series of events in which information about whether DNA replication is complete is received and converted into a molecular signal, contributing to a DNA replication checkpoint.
0050906	name:Name:detection of stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, stimulus detection	name:Synonym:sensory transduction	info:Definition:The series of events involved in sensory perception in which a sensory stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050961	name:Name:detection of temperature stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of heat stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of temperature stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of thermal stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of heat stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of thermal stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of heat stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of thermal stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of heat stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of temperature stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of temperature stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of thermal stimulus during sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events in which a sensory temperature stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050962	name:Name:detection of light stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of light stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of light stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of light stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of light stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of light stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of light stimulus during sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events in which a sensory light stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050963	name:Name:detection of electrical stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of electrical stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of electrical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of electrical stimulus during sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events in which a sensory electrical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0050974	name:Name:detection of mechanical stimulus involved in sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory detection of mechanical stimulus during sensory perception	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory detection of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory perception, sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus	name:Synonym:sensory transduction of mechanical stimulus during sensory perception	info:Definition:The series of events in which a sensory mechanical stimulus is received by a cell and converted into a molecular signal.
0051179	name:Name:localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of cellular component location	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of position	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of substance location	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of substrate location	name:Synonym:localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a cell, a substance, or a cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, is transported to, and/or maintained in a specific location.
0033036	name:Name:macromolecule localization	name:Synonym:macromolecule localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a macromolecule is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0006403	name:Name:RNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of RNA localization	name:Synonym:RNA localisation	info:Definition:A process in which RNA is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0007316	name:Name:pole plasm RNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of pole plasm RNA localization	name:Synonym:oocyte pole plasm RNA localization	name:Synonym:pole plasm RNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which RNA is transported to, or maintained in, the oocyte pole plasm. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0019093	name:Name:mitochondrial RNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of mitochondrial RNA localization	name:Synonym:mitochondrial RNA localisation	name:Synonym:mtRNA localization	info:Definition:Any process in which mitochondrial RNA is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0048254	name:Name:snoRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of snoRNA localization	name:Synonym:small nucleolar RNA localization	name:Synonym:snoRNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which small nucleolar RNA is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0008104	name:Name:protein localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of protein localization	name:Synonym:protein localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0008105	name:Name:asymmetric protein localization	name:Synonym:asymmetric protein localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of asymmetric protein localization	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location such that it is distributed asymmetrically.
0031503	name:Name:protein complex localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of protein complex localization	name:Synonym:protein complex localisation	info:Definition:A localization process that acts on a protein complex; the complex is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0035418	name:Name:protein localization to synapse	name:Synonym:protein localisation to synapse	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported to, and/or maintained at the synapse, the junction between a nerve fiber of one neuron and another neuron or muscle fiber or glial cell.
0071692	name:Name:protein localization in extracellular region	name:Synonym:protein localisation in extracellular region	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported from one specific location in the extracellular region to another, or maintained in a specific extracellular location.
0071896	name:Name:protein localization to adherens junction	name:Synonym:protein localisation to adherens junction	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is transported to, and/or maintained at the adherens junction.
0010876	name:Name:lipid localization	name:Synonym:lipid localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a lipid is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0019915	name:Name:lipid storage	name:Synonym:lipid retention	name:Synonym:lipid sequestering	name:Synonym:lipid sequestration	name:Synonym:retention of lipids	name:Synonym:sequestering of lipids	name:Synonym:sequestration of lipid	name:Synonym:sequestration of lipids	name:Synonym:storage of lipids	info:Definition:The accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of lipids, compounds soluble in organic solvents but insoluble or sparingly soluble in aqueous solvents. Lipid reserves can be accumulated during early developmental stages for mobilization and utilization at later stages of development.
0033037	name:Name:polysaccharide localization	name:Synonym:polysaccharide localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a polysaccharide is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0006033	name:Name:chitin localization	name:Synonym:chitin localisation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of chitin localization	info:Definition:A process in which chitin is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0052545	name:Name:callose localization	name:Synonym:callose localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which callose is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location. Callose is a linear 1,3-beta-d-glucan formed from UDP-glucose and is found in certain plant cell walls.
0052575	name:Name:carbohydrate localization	name:Synonym:carbohydrate localisation	info:Definition:Any process in which a carbohydrate is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location. Carbohydrates are any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0052576	name:Name:carbohydrate storage	info:Definition:The accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of carbohydrates, any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0035732	name:Name:nitric oxide storage	name:Synonym:NO storage	info:Definition:The accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of nitric oxide (NO). Nitric oxide is stored in the form of dinitrosyl-iron complexes, which are stabilized, and possibly sequestered, by binding to glutathione S-transferase proteins.
0051674	name:Name:localization of cell	name:Synonym:cell localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of cell localization	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of localization of cell	name:Synonym:localisation of cell	info:Definition:Any process in which a cell is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location.
0030720	name:Name:oocyte localization involved in germarium-derived egg chamber formation	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of oocyte localization in egg chamber	name:Synonym:establishment and maintenance of oocyte position during oogenesis	name:Synonym:oocyte localisation involved in germarium-derived egg chamber formation	name:Synonym:oocyte localization during germarium-derived egg chamber formation	name:Synonym:oocyte localization during oogenesis	name:Synonym:oocyte positioning during oogenesis	name:Synonym:oogenesis, establishment and maintenance of oocyte localization	name:Synonym:oogenesis, oocyte localization	info:Definition:Directed movement of the oocyte, following its specification, from its original central position in the cyst to a posterior position relative to the nurse cells of the egg chamber, and its maintenance in this posterior location. This is the first sign of anterior-posterior asymmetry in the developing egg chamber.
0035852	name:Name:horizontal cell localization	name:Synonym:horizontal cell positioning	name:Synonym:laminar positioning of retinal horizontal cell	name:Synonym:retinal horizontal cell positioning	info:Definition:Any process in which a horizontal cell is transported to, and/or maintained in, a specific location within the inner nuclear layer (INL) of the retina. A horizontal cell is a neuron that laterally connects other neurons in the inner nuclear layer (INL) of the retina. Targeting of retinal neurons to the appropriate lamina is vital to establish the architecture of the retina.
0051234	name:Name:establishment of localization	name:Synonym:establishment of localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a cell, substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, to a specific location.
0006810	name:Name:transport	name:Synonym:auxiliary transport protein activity	name:Synonym:small molecule transport	name:Synonym:solute:solute exchange	name:Synonym:transport accessory protein activity	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, or within a multicellular organism by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006811	name:Name:ion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of charged atoms or small charged molecules into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006812	name:Name:cation transport	name:Synonym:di-, tri-valent inorganic cation transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of cations, atoms or small molecules with a net positive charge, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006820	name:Name:anion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of anions, atoms or small molecules with a net negative charge, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006818	name:Name:hydrogen transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of hydrogen (H2 or H+), into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015992	name:Name:proton transport	name:Synonym:hydrogen ion transport	name:Synonym:passive proton transport, down the electrochemical gradient	info:Definition:The directed movement of protons (hydrogen ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015993	name:Name:molecular hydrogen transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of molecular hydrogen (H2) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006836	name:Name:neurotransmitter transport	name:Synonym:sodium:neurotransmitter transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a neurotransmitter into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Neurotransmitters are any chemical substance that is capable of transmitting (or inhibiting the transmission of) a nerve impulse from a neuron to another cell.
0001504	name:Name:neurotransmitter uptake	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter import	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter import into glial cell	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter import into neuron	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter recycling	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter reuptake	info:Definition:The directed movement of neurotransmitters into neurons or glial cells. This process leads to inactivation and recycling of neurotransmitters. It does not occur during cholinergic synaptic transmission. Instead, acetylcholine is enzymatically degraded in the synaptic cleft.
0015870	name:Name:acetylcholine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of acetylcholine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Acetylcholine is an acetic acid ester of the organic base choline and functions as a neurotransmitter, released at the synapses of parasympathetic nerves and at neuromuscular junctions.
0006856	name:Name:eye pigment precursor transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of eye pigment precursors, the inactive forms of visual pigments, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006858	name:Name:extracellular transport	info:Definition:The transport of substances that occurs outside cells.
0006859	name:Name:extracellular carbohydrate transport	info:Definition:The directed extracellular movement of carbohydrates.
0006860	name:Name:extracellular amino acid transport	info:Definition:The directed extracellular movement of amino acids.
0007300	name:Name:ovarian nurse cell to oocyte transport	name:Synonym:nurse cell to oocyte transport	info:Definition:Transfer of constituents synthesized in the ovarian nurse cells to the oocyte, through the ring canals, as the egg chamber is growing. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0009914	name:Name:hormone transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of hormones into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0048241	name:Name:epinephrine transport	name:Synonym:adrenaline transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of epinephrine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0060918	name:Name:auxin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of auxin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0070327	name:Name:thyroid hormone transport	name:Synonym:thyroxine transport	name:Synonym:triiodothyronine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of thyroid hormone into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015031	name:Name:protein transport	name:Synonym:enzyme transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006886	name:Name:intracellular protein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins in a cell, including the movement of proteins between specific compartments or structures within a cell, such as organelles of a eukaryotic cell.
0017038	name:Name:protein import	name:Synonym:protein uptake	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins into a cell or organelle.
0033571	name:Name:lactoferrin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lactoferrin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0033572	name:Name:transferrin transport	name:Synonym:melanotransferrin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of transferrin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0034436	name:Name:glycoprotein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a glycoprotein, any protein that contains covalently bound glycose (i.e. monosaccharide) residues, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042953	name:Name:lipoprotein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of any conjugated, water-soluble protein in which the nonprotein group consists of a lipid or lipids, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0043213	name:Name:bacteriocin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a bacteriocin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Bacteriocins are a group of antibiotics produced by bacteria and are encoded by a group of naturally occurring plasmids, e.g. Col E1. Bacteriocins are toxic to bacteria closely related to the bacteriocin producing strain.
0051808	name:Name:translocation of peptides or proteins into other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:translocation of peptides or proteins into other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:transport of peptides or proteins into other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of peptides or proteins produced by an organism to a location inside a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0071693	name:Name:protein transport within extracellular region	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins in the extracellular region, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0071828	name:Name:apolipoprotein E recycling	name:Synonym:APOE recycling	info:Definition:The process in which chylomicron remnant-associated apolipoprotein E is internalized by endocytosis, localized to recycling endosomes and then secreted in association with a high-density lipoprotein particle.
0072321	name:Name:chaperone-mediated protein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, mediated by chaperone molecules that bind to the transported proteins.
0072322	name:Name:protein transport across periplasmic space	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins from the plasma membrane across the periplasmic space to the outer membrane or cell wall.
0015669	name:Name:gas transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances that are gaseous in normal living conditions into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015670	name:Name:carbon dioxide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of carbon dioxide (CO2) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015671	name:Name:oxygen transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of oxygen (O2) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015833	name:Name:peptide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of peptides, compounds of two or more amino acids where the alpha carboxyl group of one is bound to the alpha amino group of another, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0002790	name:Name:peptide secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a peptide from a cell or group of cells.
0006857	name:Name:oligopeptide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of oligopeptides into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Oligopeptides are molecules that contain a small number (2 to 20) of amino-acid residues connected by peptide linkages.
0015834	name:Name:peptidoglycan-associated peptide transport	name:Synonym:murein peptide transport	name:Synonym:muropeptide transport	name:Synonym:peptidoglycan peptide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of peptidoglycan peptides into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Peptidoglycan peptides are the oligopeptides found in peptidoglycan networks which cross-link the polysaccharide chains.
0042884	name:Name:microcin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of microcin, a class of glycine-rich, bactericidal peptides (antibiotics) produced by some enteric bacteria, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0046968	name:Name:peptide antigen transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a peptide antigen into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. The peptide antigen is typically, but not always, processed from an endogenous or exogenous protein.
0071993	name:Name:phytochelatin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a phytochelatin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Phytochelatins are a group of peptides that bind metals (Cd, Zn, Cu, Pb, Hg) in thiolate coordination complexes.
0015835	name:Name:peptidoglycan transport	name:Synonym:murein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of peptidoglycans, a class of glycoconjugates found in bacterial cell walls, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015836	name:Name:lipid-linked peptidoglycan transport	name:Synonym:lipid-linked murein transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lipid-linked peptidoglycans into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015893	name:Name:drug transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a drug, a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015894	name:Name:acriflavine transport	name:Synonym:acriflavin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of acriflavine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Acriflavine is a fluorescent dye used as a local antiseptic and also as a biological stain. It intercalates into nucleic acids thereby inhibiting bacterial and viral replication.
0015897	name:Name:organomercurial transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of organomercurial compounds into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Organomercurial substances are any organic compound containing a mercury atom.
0015898	name:Name:amiloride transport	info:Definition:The directed movement amiloride into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Amiloride is a potent and specific inhibitor of sodium ion entry into cells. It is used as a potassium-sparing diuretic.
0015900	name:Name:benomyl transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of benomyl into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Benomyl, methyl 1-(butylcarbamoyl)-2-benzimidazolecarbamate, is a systemic agricultural fungicide used for control of certain fungal diseases of stone fruit.
0015902	name:Name:carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone transport	name:Synonym:CCCP transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone is a proton ionophore, commonly used as an uncoupling agent and inhibitor of photosynthesis because of its effects on mitochondrial and chloroplast membranes.
0042891	name:Name:antibiotic transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of an antibiotic, a substance produced by or derived from certain fungi, bacteria, and other organisms, that can destroy or inhibit the growth of other microorganisms, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0043215	name:Name:daunorubicin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of daunorubicin, an anthracycline antibiotic produced by Streptomyces coeruleorubidus or S. peucetius and used as an antineoplastic into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0045117	name:Name:azole transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of azoles, heterocyclic compounds found in many biologically important substances, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0046618	name:Name:drug export	info:Definition:The directed movement of a drug, a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of a disease, out of a cell or organelle.
0051958	name:Name:methotrexate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of methotrexate, 4-amino-10-methylformic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Methotrexate is a folic acid analogue and a potent competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase.
0015895	name:Name:alkane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of alkanes into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Alkanes are saturated aliphatic hydrocarbon compounds.
0015931	name:Name:nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nucleobases, nucleosides, nucleotides and nucleic acids, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006862	name:Name:nucleotide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a nucleotide, any compound consisting of a nucleoside that is esterified with (ortho)phosphate, into, out of or within a cell.
0015858	name:Name:nucleoside transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a nucleoside, a nucleobase linked to either beta-D-ribofuranose (ribonucleoside) or 2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranose, (a deoxyribonucleotide), into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015869	name:Name:protein-DNA complex transport	name:Synonym:DNA-protein complex transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of protein-DNA complexes into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0050657	name:Name:nucleic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nucleic acids, single or double-stranded polynucleotides involved in the storage, transmission and transfer of genetic information, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0019755	name:Name:one-carbon compound transport	name:Synonym:one carbon compound transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of one-carbon compounds into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042044	name:Name:fluid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances that are in liquid form in normal living conditions into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006833	name:Name:water transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of water (H2O) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042045	name:Name:epithelial fluid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of fluid across epithelia.
0042908	name:Name:xenobiotic transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a xenobiotic, a compound foreign to living organisms, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015896	name:Name:nalidixic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nalidixic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Nalidixic acid is a synthetic antibiotic that interferes with DNA gyrase and inhibits prokaryotic replication.
0042909	name:Name:acridine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of acridine (10-azaanthracene), a heterocyclic ring compound found in crude coal-tar anthracene, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042918	name:Name:alkanesulfonate transport	name:Synonym:alkanesulphonate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of an alkanesulfonate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Alkanesulfonates are organic esters or salts of sulfonic acid containing an aliphatic hydrocarbon radical.
0042919	name:Name:benzoate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of benzoate, the anion of benzoic acid (benzenecarboxylic acid) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042920	name:Name:3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid transport	name:Synonym:3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid transport	name:Synonym:m-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of 3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042969	name:Name:lactone transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lactone from one side of a membrane to the other. A lactone is a cyclic ester of a hydroxy carboxylic acid, containing a 1-oxacycloalkan-2-one structure, or an analogue having unsaturation or heteroatoms replacing one or more carbon atoms of the ring.
0046411	name:Name:2-keto-3-deoxygluconate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0046903	name:Name:secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of a substance by a cell, a group of cells, or a tissue.
0001821	name:Name:histamine secretion	info:Definition:The regulated release of histamine by a cell or group of cells. It is formed by decarboxylation of histidine and it acts through receptors in smooth muscle and in secretory systems.
0032309	name:Name:icosanoid secretion	name:Synonym:eicosanoid secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of icosanoids, any of a group of C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids.
0046717	name:Name:acid secretion	info:Definition:The controlled release of acid by a cell or group of cells.
0071836	name:Name:nectar secretion	name:Synonym:nectar production	info:Definition:The controlled release of a nectar by a cell, a group of cells, or a tissue. Nectar is a fluid secreted by many angiosperms to promote pollination by providing a reward to pollinators. Nectar may also deter certain organisms from visiting or play other biological roles. Nectar is a complex solution that may include the following types of compounds: sugars, amino acids, organic acids, alkaloids, flavonoids, glycosides, vitamins, phenolics, metal ions, oils, free fatty acids, and proteins.
0046907	name:Name:intracellular transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances within a cell.
0006839	name:Name:mitochondrial transport	name:Synonym:mitochondrial alpha-ketoglutarate/malate transport	name:Synonym:mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate transport	name:Synonym:mitochondrial sodium/calcium ion exchange	info:Definition:Transport of substances into, out of or within a mitochondrion.
0007034	name:Name:vacuolar transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances into, out of or within a vacuole.
0015680	name:Name:intracellular copper ion transport	name:Synonym:intracellular copper delivery	info:Definition:The directed movement of copper (Cu) ions within a cell.
0015859	name:Name:intracellular nucleoside transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a nucleoside, a nucleobase linked to either beta-D-ribofuranose (ribonucleoside) or 2-deoxy-beta-D-ribofuranose, (a deoxyribonucleotide), within a cell.
0016482	name:Name:cytoplasmic transport	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic streaming	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of, or within the cytoplasm of a cell.
0030705	name:Name:cytoskeleton-dependent intracellular transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances along cytoskeletal elements such as microfilaments or microtubules within a cell.
0032365	name:Name:intracellular lipid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lipids within cells.
0032472	name:Name:Golgi calcium ion transport	name:Synonym:Golgi calcium transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of calcium ions (Ca2+) into, out of or within the Golgi apparatus.
0043574	name:Name:peroxisomal transport	info:Definition:Transport of substances into, out of or within a peroxisome, a small, membrane-bounded organelle that uses dioxygen (O2) to oxidize organic molecules.
0046795	name:Name:intracellular virion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a virion within a host cell from one location to another.
0046909	name:Name:intermembrane transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances between the intracellular membranes of a cell, for example, the transfer of glycolipids from the endoplasmic reticulum to other cellular membrane structures in which they reside.
0046967	name:Name:cytosol to ER transport	name:Synonym:cytosol to endoplasmic reticulum transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances from the cytosol to the endoplasmic reticulum of a cell.
0051169	name:Name:nuclear transport	name:Synonym:nucleus transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of substances into, out of, or within the nucleus.
0055107	name:Name:Golgi to secretory granule transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins from the Golgi to a secretory granule. The secretory granule is a membrane-bounded particle, usually protein, formed in the granular endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex.
0055108	name:Name:Golgi to transport vesicle transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of proteins from the Golgi to a transport vesicle. Continuously secreted proteins are sorted into transport vesicles that fuse with the plasma membrane, releasing their contents by exocytosis.
0070296	name:Name:sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ion transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of calcium ions (Ca2+) into, out of or within the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
0080162	name:Name:intracellular auxin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of auxins within a cell. Auxins are a group of plant hormones that regulates aspects of plant growth.
0051180	name:Name:vitamin transport	name:Synonym:vitamin or cofactor transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of vitamins into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A vitamin is one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0015882	name:Name:L-ascorbic acid transport	name:Synonym:L-ascorbate transport	name:Synonym:vitamin C transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of L-ascorbic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. L-ascorbate, (2R)-2-[(1S)-1,2-dihydroxyethyl]-4-hydroxy-5-oxo-2,5-dihydrofuran-3-olate, is vitamin C and has co-factor and anti-oxidant activities in many species.
0015884	name:Name:folic acid transport	name:Synonym:folate transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B9 transport	name:Synonym:vitamin M transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Folic acid is widely distributed as a member of the vitamin B complex and is essential for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidines.
0015888	name:Name:thiamine transport	name:Synonym:thiamin transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B1 transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of thiamine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Thiamine is vitamin B1, a water soluble vitamin present in fresh vegetables and meats, especially liver.
0015889	name:Name:cobalamin transport	name:Synonym:vitamin B12 transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of cobalamin (vitamin B12), a water-soluble vitamin characterized by possession of a corrin nucleus containing a cobalt atom, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0032218	name:Name:riboflavin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of riboflavin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Riboflavin (vitamin B2) is a water-soluble B-complex vitamin, converted in the cell to FMN and FAD, cofactors required for the function of flavoproteins.
0070837	name:Name:dehydroascorbic acid transport	name:Synonym:dehydroascorbate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of dehydroascorbate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Dehydroascorbate, 5-(1,2-dihydroxyethyl)furan-2,3,4(5H)-trione, is an oxidized form of vitamin C.
0071938	name:Name:vitamin A transport	name:Synonym:vitamin A uptake and transport	info:Definition:The directed movement any form of vitamin A into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Vitamin A is any of several retinoid derivatives of beta-carotene, primarily retinol, retinal, or retinoic acid.
0051181	name:Name:cofactor transport	name:Synonym:vitamin or cofactor transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a cofactor into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A cofactor is a substance that is required for the activity of an enzyme or other protein.
0006844	name:Name:acyl carnitine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of acyl carnitine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Acyl carnitine is the condensation product of a carboxylic acid and carnitine and is the transport form for a fatty acid crossing the mitochondrial membrane.
0015877	name:Name:biopterin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of biopterin into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Biopterin is a growth factor for certain protozoans and some insects; it is widely distributed in tissues and functions in a reduced form, tetrahydrobiopterin, as a hydroxylation coenzyme.
0015885	name:Name:5-formyltetrahydrofolate transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of 5-formyltetrahydrofolate, the formylated derivative of tetrahydrofolate, into, out of, within, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015886	name:Name:heme transport	name:Synonym:haem transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of heme, any compound of iron complexed in a porphyrin (tetrapyrrole) ring, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015890	name:Name:nicotinamide mononucleotide transport	name:Synonym:nicotinamide ribonucleotide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nicotinamide mononucleotide into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Nicotinamide mononucleotide is a ribonucleotide in which the nitrogenous base, nicotinamide, is in beta-n-glycosidic linkage with the c-1 position of D-ribose. It is a constituent of NAD and NADP.
0030974	name:Name:thiamine pyrophosphate transport	name:Synonym:thiamin diphosphate transport	name:Synonym:thiamin pyrophosphate transport	name:Synonym:thiamine diphosphate transport	name:Synonym:TPP transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of thiamine pyrophosphate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042935	name:Name:achromobactin transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of achromobactin, a citrate siderophore, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0043132	name:Name:NAD transport	name:Synonym:NAD (oxidized) transport	name:Synonym:NAD (reduced) transport	name:Synonym:NADH transport	name:Synonym:nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transport	name:Synonym:oxidized NAD transport	name:Synonym:oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transport	name:Synonym:reduced NAD transport	name:Synonym:reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore; transport may be of either the oxidized form, NAD, or the reduced form, NADH.
0051182	name:Name:coenzyme transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a coenzyme into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. A coenzyme is any of various nonprotein organic cofactors that are required, in addition to an enzyme and a substrate, for an enzymatic reaction to proceed.
0051207	name:Name:silicic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of silicic acid into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Silicic acid, Si(OH)4, is a hydrated form of silicon dioxide that occurs in nature; it is insoluble in water or acids except hydrofluoric acid.
0051836	name:Name:translocation of molecules into other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:translocation of molecules into other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:transport of molecules into other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of a molecule(s) produced by an organism to a location inside a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044417	name:Name:translocation of molecules into host	name:Synonym:transport of molecules into host	info:Definition:The directed movement of a molecule(s) produced by an organism to a location inside its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051837	name:Name:translocation of DNA into other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:translocation of DNA into other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:transport of DNA into other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The directed movement of DNA from an organism to a location inside a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0051862	name:Name:translocation of molecules into symbiont	name:Synonym:transport of molecules into symbiont	info:Definition:The directed movement of molecule(s) produced by an organism to a location inside the symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051904	name:Name:pigment granule transport	name:Synonym:pigment granule translocation	info:Definition:The directed movement of pigment granules into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0032402	name:Name:melanosome transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of melanosomes into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0070633	name:Name:transepithelial transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of a substance from one side of an epithelium to the other.
0030321	name:Name:transepithelial chloride transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of chloride ions from one side of an epithelium to the other.
0035377	name:Name:transepithelial water transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of water (H2O) from one side of an epithelium to the other.
0070634	name:Name:transepithelial ammonium transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of ammonium ions from one side of an epithelium to the other.
0070904	name:Name:transepithelial L-ascorbic acid transport	name:Synonym:transepithelial L-ascorbate transport	name:Synonym:transepithelial vitamin C transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of L-ascorbic acid from one side of an epithelium to the other.
0071702	name:Name:organic substance transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of organic substances into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, or within a multicellular organism by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. An organic substance is a molecular entity that contains carbon.
0006869	name:Name:lipid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of lipids into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Lipids are compounds soluble in an organic solvent but not, or sparingly, in an aqueous solvent.
0008643	name:Name:carbohydrate transport	name:Synonym:sugar transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of carbohydrate into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. Carbohydrates are any of a group of organic compounds based of the general formula Cx(H2O)y.
0015837	name:Name:amine transport	name:Synonym:amine/polyamine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of amines, including polyamines, organic compounds containing one or more amino groups, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015849	name:Name:organic acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of organic acids, any acidic compound containing carbon in covalent linkage, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015850	name:Name:organic alcohol transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of organic alcohols into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore. An organic alcohol is any carbon-containing compound containing a hydroxyl group.
0071705	name:Name:nitrogen compound transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nitrogen-containing compounds into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0030185	name:Name:nitric oxide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of nitric oxide, nitrogen monoxide, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0042886	name:Name:amide transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of an amide, any compound containing one, two, or three acyl groups attached to a nitrogen atom, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0072348	name:Name:sulfur compound transport	name:Synonym:sulfur-containing compound transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of compounds that contain sulfur, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0000101	name:Name:sulfur amino acid transport	name:Synonym:sulphur amino acid transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of amino acids containing sulfur (cystine, methionine and their derivatives) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015805	name:Name:S-adenosylmethionine transport	name:Synonym:S-adenosyl methionine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of S-adenosylmethionine, S-(5'-adenosyl)-L-methionine, an important intermediate in one-carbon metabolism, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0015806	name:Name:S-methylmethionine transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of S-methylmethionine into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0045184	name:Name:establishment of protein localization	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation	name:Synonym:protein positioning	name:Synonym:protein recruitment	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location.
0035592	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in extracellular region	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation in extracellular region	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location within the extracellular region.
0035593	name:Name:positive regulation of Wnt receptor signaling pathway by establishment of Wnt protein localization in extracellular region	name:Synonym:positive regulation of Wnt diffusion	name:Synonym:positive regulation of Wnt receptor signaling pathway by establishment of Wnt protein localisation in extracellular region	name:Synonym:positive regulation of Wnt receptor signalling pathway by establishment of Wnt protein localization in extracellular region	name:Synonym:positive regulation of Wnt signaling range	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the Wnt receptor signaling pathway by the directed movement of a Wnt protein within the extracellular region.
0071206	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to juxtaparanode region of axon	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to juxtaparanode region of axon	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to the juxtaparanode region of an axon.
0072594	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to organelle	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to organelle	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location on or in an organelle. Encompasses establishment of localization in the membrane or lumen of a membrane-bounded organelle.
0070199	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to chromosome	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to chromosome	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location on a chromosome.
0071989	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to spindle pole body	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to spindle pole body	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location at the spindle pole body.
0072596	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to chloroplast	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to chloroplast	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in a chloroplast.
0072599	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to endoplasmic reticulum	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to ER	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localization to ER	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the endoplasmic reticulum.
0072600	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in Golgi	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to Golgi	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to Golgi apparatus	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localization to Golgi apparatus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the Golgi apparatus.
0072655	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in mitochondrion	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to mitochondrion	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the mitochondrion.
0072663	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to peroxisome	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to peroxisome	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in a peroxisome.
0072666	name:Name:establishment of protein localization to vacuole	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation to vacuole	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in a vacuole.
0090150	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in membrane	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation in membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in a membrane.
0090002	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in plasma membrane	name:Synonym:establishment of protein localisation in plasma membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the plasma membrane.
0097051	name:Name:establishment of protein localization in endoplasmic reticulum membrane	info:Definition:The directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
0051236	name:Name:establishment of RNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment of RNA localisation	name:Synonym:RNA positioning	name:Synonym:RNA recruitment	info:Definition:The directed movement of RNA to a specific location.
0046595	name:Name:establishment of pole plasm mRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte pole plasm mRNA localization	name:Synonym:establishment of pole plasm mRNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process that results in the directed movement of mRNA to the oocyte pole plasm.
0050658	name:Name:RNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of RNA, ribonucleic acids, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0006404	name:Name:RNA import into nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA import into cell nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA transport from cytoplasm to nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA-nucleus import	info:Definition:The import of RNA from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
0006405	name:Name:RNA export from nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA export from cell nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA export out of nucleus	name:Synonym:RNA transport from nucleus to cytoplasm	name:Synonym:RNA-nucleus export	info:Definition:The directed movement of RNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
0019090	name:Name:mitochondrial rRNA export from mitochondrion	name:Synonym:export of mitochondrial rRNA	name:Synonym:mitochondrial rRNA export	name:Synonym:mitochondrial rRNA export from mitochondria	name:Synonym:mitochondrial rRNA export out of mitochondrion	name:Synonym:mitochondrial rRNA transport from mitochondrion	name:Synonym:mitochondrial rRNA, mitochondrial export	info:Definition:The directed movement of mitochondrial rRNA out of a mitochondrion.
0033227	name:Name:dsRNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of dsRNA, double-stranded ribonucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0035927	name:Name:RNA import into mitochondrion	name:Synonym:cytoplasmic RNA import into mitochondrion	name:Synonym:nuclear-encoded RNA import into mitochondrion	info:Definition:The directed movement of RNA from the cytoplasm into a mitochondrion.
0051028	name:Name:mRNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of mRNA, messenger ribonucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051029	name:Name:rRNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of rRNA, ribosomal ribonucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051030	name:Name:snRNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of snRNA, small nuclear ribonucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051031	name:Name:tRNA transport	info:Definition:The directed movement of tRNA, transfer ribonucleic acid, into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051649	name:Name:establishment of localization in cell	name:Synonym:establishment of cellular localization	name:Synonym:establishment of intracellular localization	name:Synonym:establishment of localisation in cell	name:Synonym:establishment of localization within cell	name:Synonym:positioning within cell	info:Definition:The directed movement of a substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, to a specific location within, or in the membrane of, a cell.
0033753	name:Name:establishment of ribosome localization	name:Synonym:establishment of ribosome localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of the ribosome to a specific location.
0000054	name:Name:ribosomal subunit export from nucleus	name:Synonym:ribosomal subunit export from cell nucleus	name:Synonym:ribosomal subunit export out of nucleus	name:Synonym:ribosomal subunit transport from nucleus to cytoplasm	name:Synonym:ribosomal subunit-nucleus export	name:Synonym:ribosome export from nucleus	info:Definition:The directed movement of a ribosomal subunit from the nucleus into the cytoplasm.
0040023	name:Name:establishment of nucleus localization	name:Synonym:establishment of cell nucleus localization	name:Synonym:establishment of localization of nucleus	name:Synonym:establishment of nucleus localisation	name:Synonym:establishment of position of nucleus	name:Synonym:nuclear positioning	name:Synonym:nucleus positioning	name:Synonym:positioning of nucleus	info:Definition:The directed movement of the nucleus to a specific location within a cell.
0007097	name:Name:nuclear migration	name:Synonym:nucleus migration	info:Definition:The directed movement of the nucleus.
0030722	name:Name:establishment of oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:establishment of localization of oocyte nucleus during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte nucleus localisation involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte nucleus localization during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal-ventral axis specification	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsal/ventral axis determination	name:Synonym:establishment of oocyte nucleus localization involved in oocyte dorsoventral axis specification	name:Synonym:nucleus positioning in oocyte during oocyte axis determination	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, establishment of localization of nucleus	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, establishment of oocyte nucleus localization	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, establishment of position of nucleus	name:Synonym:oocyte axis determination, positioning of nucleus	name:Synonym:oocyte nucleus positioning during oocyte axis determination	info:Definition:The directed movement of the nucleus to a specific location within the cell during the establishment and maintenance of the dorsal/ventral axis of the oocyte. In the insect oocyte, for example, the nucleus is repositioned to a dorso-anterior position.
0051303	name:Name:establishment of chromosome localization	name:Synonym:chromosome positioning	name:Synonym:establishment of chromosome localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a chromosome to a specific location.
0051305	name:Name:chromosome movement towards spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome migration to spindle pole	name:Synonym:chromosome movement	name:Synonym:chromosome movement to spindle pole	info:Definition:The directed movement of chromosomes in the center of the spindle towards the spindle poles, mediated by the shortening of microtubules attached to the chromosomes.
0051310	name:Name:metaphase plate congression	name:Synonym:chromosome congression	info:Definition:The alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate, a plane halfway between the poles of the spindle.
0090220	name:Name:chromosome localization to nuclear envelope involved in synapsis	name:Synonym:chromosome localisation to nuclear envelope involved in synapsis	info:Definition:The directed movement of a chromosome to the nuclear envelope that contributes to synapsis.
0051650	name:Name:establishment of vesicle localization	name:Synonym:establishment of vesicle localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a vesicle to a specific location.
0032254	name:Name:establishment of secretory granule localization	name:Synonym:establishment of secretory granule localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a secretory granule to a specific location.
0051905	name:Name:establishment of pigment granule localization	name:Synonym:establishment of pigment granule localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a pigment granule to a specific location.
0051654	name:Name:establishment of mitochondrion localization	name:Synonym:establishment of mitochondria localization	name:Synonym:establishment of mitochondrion localisation	name:Synonym:mitochondria positioning	name:Synonym:mitochondrial migration	name:Synonym:mitochondrion positioning	info:Definition:The directed movement of the mitochondrion to a specific location.
0090146	name:Name:establishment of mitochondrion localization involved in mitochondrial fission	name:Synonym:establishment of mitochondrion localisation involved in mitochondrial fission	name:Synonym:mitochondrial localization involved in mitochondrial fission	info:Definition:The directed movement of mitochondria to the correct region of the cell that contributes to the process of mitochondrial fission.
0051660	name:Name:establishment of centrosome localization	name:Synonym:centrosome positioning	name:Synonym:establishment of centrosome localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of the centrosome to a specific location.
0051667	name:Name:establishment of plastid localization	name:Synonym:establishment of plastid localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of a plastid to a specific location in the cell.
0009902	name:Name:chloroplast relocation	name:Synonym:chloroplast movement	info:Definition:The process in which chloroplasts in photosynthetic cells migrate toward illuminated sites to optimize photosynthesis and move away from excessively illuminated areas to protect the photosynthetic machinery.
0051683	name:Name:establishment of Golgi localization	name:Synonym:establishment of Golgi apparatus localization	name:Synonym:establishment of Golgi body localization	name:Synonym:establishment of Golgi localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of the Golgi to a specific location.
0051686	name:Name:establishment of ER localization	name:Synonym:establishment of endoplasmic reticulum localization	name:Synonym:establishment of ER localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of the endoplasmic reticulum to a specific location.
0061166	name:Name:establishment of endoplasmic reticulum localization involved in endoplasmic reticulum polarization at cell division site	name:Synonym:establishment of endoplasmic reticulum localisation involved in endoplasmic reticulum polarization at cell division site	info:Definition:The directed movement of the endoplasmic reticulum to the site where a cell will divide.
0051656	name:Name:establishment of organelle localization	name:Synonym:establishment of organelle localisation	info:Definition:The directed movement of an organelle to a specific location.
0051704	name:Name:multi-organism process	name:Synonym:interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:physiological interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:physiological interaction with other organism	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism has an effect on another organism of the same or different species.
0000128	name:Name:flocculation	info:Definition:The non-sexual aggregation of single-celled organisms.
0000501	name:Name:flocculation via cell wall protein-carbohydrate interaction	info:Definition:Mannose-sensitive, nonsexual aggregation of cells mediated by protein-carbohydrate (flocculin-mannan) interaction present in the cell wall. This process is pH- and calcium-dependent and reversible. An example of this process is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0032128	name:Name:flocculation via extracellular polymer	name:Synonym:flocculation via EBF	name:Synonym:flocculation via extracellular biopolymeric flocculants	info:Definition:Non-sexual aggregation of single-celled organisms mediated by polymers (polysaccharides, proteins, and/or nucleic acids) secreted into the extracellular environment.
0000746	name:Name:conjugation	info:Definition:The union or introduction of genetic information from compatible mating types that results in a genetically different individual. Conjugation requires direct cellular contact between the organisms.
0000748	name:Name:conjugation with mutual genetic exchange	name:Synonym:conjugation without cellular fusion	info:Definition:A conjugation process that results in the mutual exchange and union of only genetic information between compatible mating types. Conjugation without cellular fusion requires direct cellular contact between the organisms without plasma membrane fusion. The organisms involved in conjugation without cellular fusion separate after nuclear exchange.
0009291	name:Name:unidirectional conjugation	name:Synonym:mating	info:Definition:The process of unidirectional (polarized) transfer of genetic information involving direct cellular contact between a donor and recipient cell; the contact is followed by the formation of a cellular bridge that physically connects the cells; some or all of the chromosome(s) of one cell ('male') is then transferred into the other cell ('female'); unidirectional conjugation occurs between cells of different mating types. Examples of this process are found in Prokaryotes.
0000762	name:Name:pheromone-induced unidirectional conjugation	info:Definition:The process of unidirectional (polarized) transfer of genetic information in response to a pheromone. It involves direct cellular contact between a donor and recipient cell; the contact is followed by the formation of a cellular bridge that physically connects the cells; some or all of the chromosome(s) of one cell ('male') is then transferred into the other cell ('female'); unidirectional conjugation occurs between cells of different mating types.
0009292	name:Name:genetic transfer	name:Synonym:genetic exchange	info:Definition:In the absence of a sexual life cycle, the process involved in the introduction of genetic information to create a genetically different individual.
0009293	name:Name:transduction	info:Definition:The transfer of genetic information to a bacterium from a bacteriophage or between bacterial or yeast cells mediated by a phage vector.
0009294	name:Name:DNA mediated transformation	name:Synonym:DNA-mediated transformation	info:Definition:The introduction and uptake of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA) into a cell, and often the expression of that genetic material.
0009405	name:Name:pathogenesis	name:Synonym:channel-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:cytotoxin activity	name:Synonym:endotoxin activity	name:Synonym:enterotoxin activity	name:Synonym:exotoxin activity	name:Synonym:lipoprotein toxin	name:Synonym:neurotoxin activity	name:Synonym:pore-forming toxin activity	name:Synonym:toxin activity	name:Synonym:virulence	info:Definition:The set of specific processes that generate the ability of an organism to cause disease in another.
0035915	name:Name:pore complex assembly in other organism	name:Synonym:pore biosynthesis in other organism	name:Synonym:pore complex biogenesis in other organism	name:Synonym:pore formation in other organism	name:Synonym:pore-forming toxin activity 	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components by an organism to form a pore complex in another organism.
0042710	name:Name:biofilm formation	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms irreversibly attach to and grow on a surface and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription.
0032022	name:Name:multicellular pellicle formation	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms produce an extracellular matrix and form multicellular aggregates at an air-liquid interface.
0044010	name:Name:single-species biofilm formation	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of the same species attach to and grow on a surface such, and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription.
0044011	name:Name:single-species biofilm formation on inanimate substrate	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of the same species attach to and grow on an inanimate surface such as a rock or pipe, and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription.
0044399	name:Name:multi-species biofilm formation	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of different species attach to and grow on a surface and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription.
0044400	name:Name:multi-species biofilm formation on inanimate substrate	info:Definition:A process in which microorganisms of different species attach to and grow on an inanimate surface such as a rock or pipe and produce extracellular polymers that facilitate attachment and matrix formation, resulting in an alteration in the phenotype of the organisms with respect to growth rate and gene transcription.
0044235	name:Name:cellular component organization in other organism	info:Definition:A process which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellular component in a second organism.
0044234	name:Name:cell wall organization in other organism	info:Definition:A process performed by an organism that results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the cell wall of a second organism.
0044419	name:Name:interspecies interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:interaction with another species	name:Synonym:interspecies interaction	name:Synonym:interspecies interaction with other organisms	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism has an effect on an organism of a different species.
0035821	name:Name:modification of morphology or physiology of other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of morphology of other organism 	name:Synonym:regulation of morphology or physiology of other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of physiological process of other organism 	name:Synonym:regulation of physiology of other organism	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the structure or processes of a second organism.
0035806	name:Name:modulation of blood coagulation in other organism	name:Synonym:modulation by organism of blood clotting in other organism	name:Synonym:modulation by organism of blood coagulation in other organism	name:Synonym:regulation by organism of blood clotting in other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of blood clotting in other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of blood coagulation in other organism	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism modulates the frequency, rate or extent of blood coagulation in another organism. Blood coagulation is the sequential process in which the multiple coagulation factors of the blood interact, ultimately resulting in the formation of an insoluble fibrin clot.
0035895	name:Name:modulation of mast cell degranulation in other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of mast cell degranulation in other organism 	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism modulates the frequency, rate or extent of blood mast cell degranulation in another organism. Mast cell degranulation is the regulated exocytosis of secretory granules containing preformed mediators such as histamine, serotonin, and neutral proteases by a mast cell.
0035916	name:Name:modulation of calcium channel activity in other organism	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism effects a change in the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of a calcium channel in another organism.
0035940	name:Name:negative regulation of peptidase activity in other organism	name:Synonym:down regulation of peptidase activity in other organism	name:Synonym:down-regulation of protease activity in other organism	name:Synonym:downregulation of peptidase activity in other organism	name:Synonym:inhibition of protease activity in other organism	name:Synonym:negative regulation of protease activity in other organism	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of peptidase activity, the catalysis of the hydrolysis of peptide bonds in a protein, in a second organism.
0051817	name:Name:modification of morphology or physiology of other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modification of morphology or physiology of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modulation of morphology or physiology of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of morphology of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of morphology or physiology of other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of physiological process in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of physiology of other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the structure or processes of a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0044402	name:Name:competition with other organism	name:Synonym:competition with another organism	name:Synonym:interspecies competition	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism within a multispecies community gains an advantage in growth or survival over another organism of a different species in that community.
0044403	name:Name:symbiosis, encompassing mutualism through parasitism	name:Synonym:host-pathogen interaction	name:Synonym:symbiosis	name:Synonym:symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:symbiotic interaction between host and organism	name:Synonym:symbiotic interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:symbiotic interaction between species	name:Synonym:symbiotic interaction with other non-host organism	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association. The term host is usually used for the larger (macro) of the two members of a symbiosis. The smaller (micro) member is called the symbiont organism. Microscopic symbionts are often referred to as endosymbionts. The various forms of symbiosis include parasitism, in which the association is disadvantageous or destructive to one of the organisms; mutualism, in which the association is advantageous, or often necessary to one or both and not harmful to either; and commensalism, in which one member of the association benefits while the other is not affected. However, mutualism, parasitism, and commensalism are often not discrete categories of interactions and should rather be perceived as a continuum of interaction ranging from parasitism to mutualism. In fact, the direction of a symbiotic interaction can change during the lifetime of the symbionts due to developmental changes as well as changes in the biotic/abiotic environment in which the interaction occurs.
0009877	name:Name:nodulation	name:Synonym:nodule development	name:Synonym:nodule formation	info:Definition:The formation of nitrogen-fixing root nodules on plant roots.
0072519	name:Name:parasitism	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association in a relationship in which association is disadvantageous or destructive to one of the organisms.
0085030	name:Name:mutualism	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association in a relationship in which both organisms benefit from each other.
0085031	name:Name:commensalism	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association in a relationship in which one benefits and the other is unaffected.
0051701	name:Name:interaction with host	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association. The term host is used for the larger (macro) of the two members of a symbiosis; the various forms of symbiosis include parasitism, commensalism and mutualism.
0020021	name:Name:immortalization of host cell	name:Synonym:host cell immortalization	name:Synonym:host cell transformation	name:Synonym:transformation of host cell	info:Definition:The modification of a host cell into an immortal cell line as a consequence of infection. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0030581	name:Name:symbiont intracellular protein transport in host	name:Synonym:host cell protein transport	name:Synonym:intracellular protein transport in host	info:Definition:The directed movement of a symbiont's proteins within a cell of the host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044002	name:Name:acquisition of nutrients from host	info:Definition:The process that begins with the production and formation of structures and molecules in an organism that are required for the acquisition and utilization of nutrients from its host organism, and the ends with the acquirement of the nutrients. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044003	name:Name:modification by symbiont of host morphology or physiology	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the structure or processes of its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044044	name:Name:interaction with host via substance in symbiont surface	info:Definition:An interaction with the host organism mediated by a substance on the surface of the other (symbiont) organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0044046	name:Name:interaction with host via substance released outside of symbiont	name:Synonym:interaction with host via substance released outside of symbiont cells	info:Definition:An interaction with the host organism mediated by a substance that is released by the other organism. This includes substances that are released via pathogen cell lysis.
0075325	name:Name:spore dispersal on or near host	name:Synonym:spore dispersal on or near host during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process in which a symbiont disseminates its spores, on or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051702	name:Name:interaction with symbiont	info:Definition:An interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association. The term symbiont is used for the smaller (macro) of the two members of a symbiosis; the various forms of symbiosis include parasitism, commensalism and mutualism.
0051850	name:Name:acquisition of nutrients from symbiont	info:Definition:The production of structures and/or molecules in an organism that are required for the acquisition and/or utilization of nutrients obtained from its symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051851	name:Name:modification by host of symbiont morphology or physiology	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the structure or processes of a symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051855	name:Name:recognition of symbiont	info:Definition:The set of specific processes that allow an organism to detect the presence of its symbiont via physical or chemical signals. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0051858	name:Name:avoidance of symbiont defenses	info:Definition:Any process, either constitutive or induced, by which an organism evades, minimizes, or suppresses the effects of its symbiont organism's defense(s). The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052213	name:Name:interaction with symbiont via secreted substance involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with symbiont via secreted substance during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with the symbiont organism mediated by a substance secreted by the other (host) organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052047	name:Name:interaction with other organism via secreted substance involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with other organism via secreted substance during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with a second organism mediated by a substance secreted by the first organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052048	name:Name:interaction with host via secreted substance involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with host via secreted substance during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with the host organism mediated by a substance secreted by the other (symbiont) organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052209	name:Name:interaction with other organism via substance secreted by type IV secretion system involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with other organism via substance secreted by type IV secretion system during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with a second organism mediated by a substance secreted by the first organism by a type IV secretion system, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052210	name:Name:interaction with other organism via protein secreted by type III secretion system involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with other organism via protein secreted by type III secretion system during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with a second organism mediated by a substance secreted by the first organism by a type III secretion system, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052211	name:Name:interaction with other organism via protein secreted by type II secretion system involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:interaction with other organism via protein secreted by type II secretion system during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:An interaction with a second organism mediated by a substance secreted by the first organism by a type II secretion system, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052212	name:Name:modification of morphology or physiology of other organism via secreted substance involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modification of host morphology or physiology via effector molecule	name:Synonym:modification of host morphology or physiology via ellicitor	name:Synonym:modification of morphology or physiology of other organism via secreted substance during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the structure or function of a second organism, mediated by a substance secreted by one of the organisms, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052097	name:Name:interspecies quorum sensing	info:Definition:The process in which a community of single-celled organisms of different species monitors population density by detecting the concentration of small diffusible signal molecules.
0052106	name:Name:quorum sensing involved in interaction with host	name:Synonym:quorum sensing during interaction with host	info:Definition:The process in which a community of single-celled organisms living in intimate contact with a host organism monitors population density by detecting the concentration of small diffusible signal molecules. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0048874	name:Name:homeostasis of number of cells in a free-living population	info:Definition:The biological process involved in maintaining the steady-state number of cells within a population of free-living cells such as the bacteria in the gut.
0009372	name:Name:quorum sensing	name:Synonym:quorum sensing system	info:Definition:The process in which single-celled organisms monitor their population density by detecting the concentration of small, diffusible signal molecules produced by the cells themselves.
0052100	name:Name:intraspecies quorum sensing	info:Definition:The process in which single-celled organisms of the same species monitor population density by detecting the concentration of small, diffusible signal molecules.
0060274	name:Name:maintenance of stationary phase	info:Definition:The homeostatic process in which a population of cells changes its metabolic activity resulting in the rate of death in the population equaling the rate of reproduction. Stationary phase can be in response to limited nutrients or a build-up of toxic substances in the environment.
0051673	name:Name:membrane disruption in other organism	name:Synonym:cytolysis, by membrane disruption, in other organism	name:Synonym:membrane disruption in another organism	info:Definition:The disruption of the membranes of another organism, leading to damage to its cells and possibly death of that organism.
0051703	name:Name:intraspecies interaction between organisms	name:Synonym:intraspecies interaction with other organisms	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism has an effect on an organism of the same species.
0010483	name:Name:pollen tube reception	info:Definition:Interaction between the pollen tube, part of the male gametophyte, and the ovule, part of the female gametophyte, that results in the arrest of pollen tube growth, rupture of the pollen tube and the release of the sperm cells.
0065007	name:Name:biological regulation	name:Synonym:regulation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of any biological process, quality or function.
0050789	name:Name:regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:regulation of physiological process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a biological process. Biological processes are regulated by many means; examples include the control of gene expression, protein modification or interaction with a protein or substrate molecule.
0002682	name:Name:regulation of immune system process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of an immune system process.
0002577	name:Name:regulation of antigen processing and presentation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of antigen processing and presentation.
0002643	name:Name:regulation of tolerance induction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of tolerance induction.
0002683	name:Name:negative regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:down regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:downregulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:inhibition of immune system process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate, or extent of an immune system process.
0002684	name:Name:positive regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:activation of immune system process	name:Synonym:stimulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:up regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of immune system process	name:Synonym:upregulation of immune system process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate, or extent of an immune system process.
0002685	name:Name:regulation of leukocyte migration	name:Synonym:regulation of immune cell migration	name:Synonym:regulation of leucocyte migration	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of leukocyte migration.
0002694	name:Name:regulation of leukocyte activation	name:Synonym:regulation of immune cell activation	name:Synonym:regulation of leucocyte activation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of leukocyte activation.
0002697	name:Name:regulation of immune effector process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of an immune effector process.
0002905	name:Name:regulation of mature B cell apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of mature B cell apoptosis.
0033025	name:Name:regulation of mast cell apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of mast cell apoptosis.
0033029	name:Name:regulation of neutrophil apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of neutrophil apoptosis.
0034121	name:Name:regulation of toll-like receptor signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of TLR signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of toll-like receptor signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of toll-like receptor signaling pathway.
0035206	name:Name:regulation of hemocyte proliferation	name:Synonym:regulation of arthropod blood cell proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of hemocyte proliferation. Hemocytes are blood cells associated with a hemocoel (the cavity containing most of the major organs of the arthropod body) which are involved in defense and clotting of hemolymph, but not involved in transport of oxygen. An example of this is found in Drosophila melanogaster.
0045610	name:Name:regulation of hemocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:regulation of arthropod blood cell differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of hemocyte differentiation.
0045637	name:Name:regulation of myeloid cell differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of myeloid cell differentiation.
0050776	name:Name:regulation of immune response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the immune response, the immunological reaction of an organism to an immunogenic stimulus.
0050854	name:Name:regulation of antigen receptor-mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of antigen receptor mediated signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signaling pathways initiated by the cross-linking of an antigen receptor on a B- or T cell.
0060368	name:Name:regulation of Fc receptor mediated stimulatory signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of Fc receptor mediated stimulatory signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the Fc receptor mediated stimulatory signaling pathway. The Fc receptor mediated stimulatory signaling pathway is a series of molecular signals generated as a consequence of a the binding of the Fc portion of an immunoglobulin by an Fc receptor capable of activating or perpetuating an immune response. The Fc portion of an immunoglobulin is its C-terminal constant region.
0070235	name:Name:regulation of activation-induced cell death of T cells	name:Synonym:regulation of activated T cell apoptosis	name:Synonym:regulation of activation-induced cell death of T lymphocytes	name:Synonym:regulation of activation-induced cell death of T-cells	name:Synonym:regulation of activation-induced cell death of T-lymphocytes	name:Synonym:regulation of AICD	name:Synonym:regulation of antigen-driven apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the occurrence or rate of activation-induced cell death of T cells.
0070239	name:Name:regulation of activated T cell autonomous cell death	name:Synonym:regulation of ACAD	name:Synonym:regulation of activated cell autonomous cell death	name:Synonym:regulation of activated T cell apoptosis	name:Synonym:regulation of activated T lymphocyte autonomous cell death	name:Synonym:regulation of activated T-cell autonomous cell death	name:Synonym:regulation of activated T-lymphocyte autonomous cell death	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the occurrence or rate of lymphocyte death by apoptosis.
0070424	name:Name:regulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of NOD signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of a nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing (NOD) pathway.
2000523	name:Name:regulation of T cell costimulation	name:Synonym:regulation of T cell co-stimulation	name:Synonym:regulation of T lymphocyte costimulation	name:Synonym:regulation of T-cell co-stimulation	name:Synonym:regulation of T-cell costimulation	name:Synonym:regulation of T-lymphocyte costimulation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of T cell costimulation.
0006792	name:Name:regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:regulation of sulphur utilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of sulfur utilization.
0045882	name:Name:negative regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:down regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:down-regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:downregulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:inhibition of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:negative regulation of sulphur utilization	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of sulfur utilization.
0045883	name:Name:positive regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:activation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:positive regulation of sulphur utilization	name:Synonym:stimulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:up regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:up-regulation of sulfur utilization	name:Synonym:upregulation of sulfur utilization	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of sulfur utilization.
0006795	name:Name:regulation of phosphorus utilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of phosphorus utilization.
0045942	name:Name:negative regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:down regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:down-regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:downregulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:inhibition of phosphorus utilization	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of phosphorus utilization.
0045949	name:Name:positive regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:activation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:stimulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:up regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:up-regulation of phosphorus utilization	name:Synonym:upregulation of phosphorus utilization	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of phosphorus utilization.
0006808	name:Name:regulation of nitrogen utilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of nitrogen utilization.
0045847	name:Name:negative regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:down regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:down-regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:downregulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:inhibition of nitrogen utilization	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of nitrogen utilization.
0045848	name:Name:positive regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:activation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:stimulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:up regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:up-regulation of nitrogen utilization	name:Synonym:upregulation of nitrogen utilization	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of nitrogen utilization.
0090293	name:Name:nitrogen catabolite regulation of transcription	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription by nitrogen catabolites	info:Definition:A transcription regulation process in which the presence of one nitrogen source leads to the modulation of the frequency, rate, or extent of transcription of specific genes involved in the metabolism of other nitrogen sources.
0019222	name:Name:regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways within a cell or an organism.
0009889	name:Name:regulation of biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of formation	name:Synonym:regulation of synthesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances.
0009892	name:Name:negative regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:down regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:downregulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:inhibition of metabolic process	name:Synonym:negative regulation of metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways within a cell or an organism.
0009893	name:Name:positive regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:activation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:positive regulation of metabolism	name:Synonym:stimulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:up regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of metabolic process	name:Synonym:upregulation of metabolic process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways within a cell or an organism.
0009894	name:Name:regulation of catabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of breakdown	name:Synonym:regulation of catabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of degradation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of substances.
0030656	name:Name:regulation of vitamin metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of vitamin metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving a vitamin, one of a number of unrelated organic substances that occur in many foods in small amounts and that are necessary in trace amounts for the normal metabolic functioning of the body.
0031323	name:Name:regulation of cellular metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways by which individual cells transform chemical substances.
0032350	name:Name:regulation of hormone metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of hormone metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving any hormone.
0043455	name:Name:regulation of secondary metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of secondary metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of secondary metabolism, the chemical reactions and pathways involving compounds that are not necessarily required for growth and maintenance of cells, and are often unique to a taxon.
0044246	name:Name:regulation of multicellular organismal metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of organismal metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of organismal metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of chemical reactions and pathways in multicellular organisms that occur at the tissue, organ, or organismal level.
0050790	name:Name:regulation of catalytic activity	name:Synonym:regulation of enzyme activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the activity of an enzyme.
0051171	name:Name:regulation of nitrogen compound metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of nitrogen metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of nitrogen metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving nitrogen or nitrogenous compounds.
0060255	name:Name:regulation of macromolecule metabolic process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving macromolecules, any molecule of high relative molecular mass, the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass.
0060263	name:Name:regulation of respiratory burst	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate frequency or extent of a phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases; this leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals.
0080090	name:Name:regulation of primary metabolic process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways within a cell or an organism involving those compounds formed as a part of the normal anabolic and catabolic processes. These processes take place in most, if not all, cells of the organism.
0023051	name:Name:regulation of signaling	name:Synonym:regulation of signaling process	name:Synonym:regulation of signalling process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a signaling process.
0001919	name:Name:regulation of receptor recycling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of receptor recycling.
0009966	name:Name:regulation of signal transduction	name:Synonym:regulation of signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signal transduction.
0014048	name:Name:regulation of glutamate secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the controlled release of glutamate.
0014052	name:Name:regulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of GABA secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of gamma-aminobutyric acid.
0014059	name:Name:regulation of dopamine secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of dopamine.
0014062	name:Name:regulation of serotonin secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of serotonin.
0023056	name:Name:positive regulation of signaling	name:Synonym:positive regulation of signaling process	name:Synonym:positive regulation of signalling process	info:Definition:Any process that activates, maintains or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a signaling process.
0023057	name:Name:negative regulation of signaling	name:Synonym:negative regulation of signaling process	name:Synonym:negative regulation of signalling process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a signaling process.
0046883	name:Name:regulation of hormone secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of a hormone from a cell or group of cells.
0051969	name:Name:regulation of transmission of nerve impulse	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of transmission of a nerve impulse, the sequential electrochemical polarization and depolarization that travels across the membrane of a neuron in response to stimulation.
0061356	name:Name:regulation of Wnt protein secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the controlled release of a Wnt protein from a cell or group of cells.
0090381	name:Name:regulation of heart induction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of heart induction. Heart induction is the close range interaction between mesoderm and endoderm or ectoderm that causes cells to change their fates and specify the development of the heart.
0031341	name:Name:regulation of cell killing	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell killing, the process in which a cell brings about the death of another cell, either in the same or a different organism.
0001910	name:Name:regulation of leukocyte mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:regulation of immune cell mediated cell death	name:Synonym:regulation of immune cell mediated cell killing	name:Synonym:regulation of immune cell mediated cytotoxicity	name:Synonym:regulation of leucocyte mediated cytotoxicity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of leukocyte mediated cytotoxicity.
0031342	name:Name:negative regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:down regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:down-regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:downregulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:inhibition of cell killing	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of cell killing.
0031343	name:Name:positive regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:activation of cell killing	name:Synonym:stimulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:up regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:up-regulation of cell killing	name:Synonym:upregulation of cell killing	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cell killing.
0051709	name:Name:regulation of killing of cells of other organism	name:Synonym:regulation of killing of cells of another organism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the killing by an organism of cells in another organism.
0032844	name:Name:regulation of homeostatic process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of a homeostatic process.
0010993	name:Name:regulation of ubiquitin homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of ubiquitin homeostasis. Ubiquitin homeostasis is any process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of ubiquitin monomers and free ubiquitin chains at the level of the cell.
0031650	name:Name:regulation of heat generation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or extent of heat generation.
0031654	name:Name:regulation of heat dissipation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or extent of heat dissipation.
0032204	name:Name:regulation of telomere maintenance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a process that affects and monitors the activity of telomeric proteins and the length of telomeric DNA.
0032845	name:Name:negative regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:down regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:downregulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:inhibition of homeostatic process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate, or extent of a homeostatic process.
0032846	name:Name:positive regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:activation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:stimulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:up regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of homeostatic process	name:Synonym:upregulation of homeostatic process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate, or extent of a homeostatic process.
0034106	name:Name:regulation of erythrocyte clearance	name:Synonym:regulation of neocytolysis	name:Synonym:regulation of RBC clearance	name:Synonym:regulation of red blood cell clearance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of erythrocyte clearance.
0045124	name:Name:regulation of bone resorption	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of bone tissue loss (resorption).
0045646	name:Name:regulation of erythrocyte differentiation	name:Synonym:regulation of RBC differentiation	name:Synonym:regulation of red blood cell differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of erythrocyte differentiation.
0046013	name:Name:regulation of T cell homeostatic proliferation	name:Synonym:regulation of resting T cell proliferation	name:Synonym:regulation of T lymphocyte homeostatic proliferation	name:Synonym:regulation of T-cell homeostatic proliferation	name:Synonym:regulation of T-lymphocyte homeostatic proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of resting T cell proliferation.
0060730	name:Name:regulation of intestinal epithelial structure maintenance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of intestinal epithelial structure maintenance, a tissue homeostatic process required for the maintenance of the structure of the intestinal epithelium.
0061178	name:Name:regulation of insulin secretion involved in cellular response to glucose stimulus	name:Synonym:regulation of insulin secretion in response to glucose	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of insulin that contributes to the response of a cell to glucose.
2000021	name:Name:regulation of ion homeostasis	name:Synonym:regulation of electrolyte homeostasis	name:Synonym:regulation of negative regulation of crystal biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of negative regulation of crystal formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ion homeostasis.
2000188	name:Name:regulation of cholesterol homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cholesterol homeostasis.
2000505	name:Name:regulation of energy homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of energy homeostasis.
0032879	name:Name:regulation of localization	name:Synonym:regulation of localisation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of any process in which a cell, a substance, or a cellular entity is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0010883	name:Name:regulation of lipid storage	name:Synonym:regulation of lipid sequestration	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of lipid storage. Lipid storage is the accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of lipids, compounds soluble in organic solvents but insoluble or sparingly soluble in aqueous solvents. Lipid reserves can be accumulated during early developmental stages for mobilization and utilization at later stages of development.
0032880	name:Name:regulation of protein localization	name:Synonym:regulation of protein localisation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of any process in which a protein is transported to, or maintained in, a specific location.
0051049	name:Name:regulation of transport	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051270	name:Name:regulation of cellular component movement	name:Synonym:regulation of cell movement	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular component motion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the movement of a cellular component.
0051282	name:Name:regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) retention	name:Synonym:regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestering	name:Synonym:regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestration	name:Synonym:regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) storage	name:Synonym:regulation of retention of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:regulation of sequestering of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:regulation of sequestration of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:regulation of storage of calcium ion (Ca2+)	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the binding or confining calcium ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0060341	name:Name:regulation of cellular localization	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular localisation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a process in which a cell, a substance, or a cellular entity is transported to, or maintained in a specific location within or in the membrane of a cell.
0061088	name:Name:regulation of sequestering of zinc ion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of sequestering of zinc ion. Sequestering of zinc ion is the process of binding or confining zinc ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
2000071	name:Name:regulation of defense response by callose deposition	name:Synonym:regulation of callose deposition during defense response	name:Synonym:regulation of callose localization during defense response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of defense response by callose deposition.
0040008	name:Name:regulation of growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the growth of all or part of an organism so that it occurs at its proper speed, either globally or in a specific part of the organism's development.
0001558	name:Name:regulation of cell growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, extent or direction of cell growth.
0010568	name:Name:regulation of budding cell apical bud growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of growth at the tip of a bud, in a cell that reproduces by budding.
0010570	name:Name:regulation of filamentous growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process in which a multicellular organism or a group of unicellular organisms grow in a threadlike, filamentous shape.
0040009	name:Name:regulation of growth rate	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate of growth of all or part of an organism.
0040014	name:Name:regulation of multicellular organism growth	name:Synonym:regulation of body growth	name:Synonym:regulation of body size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of growth of the body of an organism so that it reaches its usual body size.
0044126	name:Name:regulation of growth of symbiont in host	info:Definition:Any process in which the symbiont regulates the increase in its size or mass within the cells or tissues of the host organism. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in the symbiotic interaction.
0044144	name:Name:modulation of growth of symbiont involved in interaction with host	name:Synonym:modulation of growth of symbiont during interaction with host	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the increase in size or mass of an organism occurring in, on or near the exterior of its host organism.
0045926	name:Name:negative regulation of growth	name:Synonym:down regulation of growth	name:Synonym:down-regulation of growth	name:Synonym:downregulation of growth	name:Synonym:inhibition of growth	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the rate or extent of growth, the increase in size or mass of all or part of an organism.
0045927	name:Name:positive regulation of growth	name:Synonym:activation of growth	name:Synonym:stimulation of growth	name:Synonym:up regulation of growth	name:Synonym:up-regulation of growth	name:Synonym:upregulation of growth	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of growth, the increase in size or mass of all or part of an organism.
0046620	name:Name:regulation of organ growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of growth of an organ of an organism.
0048638	name:Name:regulation of developmental growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of developmental growth.
2000603	name:Name:regulation of secondary growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of secondary growth.
0040012	name:Name:regulation of locomotion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of locomotion of a cell or organism.
0040013	name:Name:negative regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:down regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:down-regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:downregulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:inhibition of locomotion	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of locomotion of a cell or organism.
0040017	name:Name:positive regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:activation of locomotion	name:Synonym:stimulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:up regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:up-regulation of locomotion	name:Synonym:upregulation of locomotion	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of locomotion of a cell or organism.
0043058	name:Name:regulation of backward locomotion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the speed, mechanical force, or rhythm of the posterior movement of an organism.
0043059	name:Name:regulation of forward locomotion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the speed, mechanical force, or rhythm of the anterior movement of an organism.
0046596	name:Name:regulation of virion penetration into host cell	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the introduction of virus particles into the cell.
0050920	name:Name:regulation of chemotaxis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of a motile cell or organism in response to a specific chemical concentration gradient.
0052371	name:Name:regulation by organism of entry into other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modulation by organism of entry into other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:regulation by organism of entry into other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism modulates the frequency, rate or extent to which it enters into a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0075231	name:Name:modulation of spore movement on or near host	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of spore movement on or near its host organism. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0090325	name:Name:regulation of locomotion involved in locomotory behavior	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of the self-propelled movement of a cell or organism from one location to another in a behavioral context; the aspect of locomotory behavior having to do with movement.
2000145	name:Name:regulation of cell motility	name:Synonym:regulation of cell locomotion	name:Synonym:regulation of cell movement	name:Synonym:regulation of movement of a cell	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell motility.
2000535	name:Name:regulation of entry of bacterium into host cell	name:Synonym:regulation of bacterial entry into host cell	name:Synonym:regulation of invasion of bacteria into host cell	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of entry of bacterium into host cell.
0042752	name:Name:regulation of circadian rhythm	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a circadian rhythm. A circadian rhythm is a biological process in an organism that recurs with a regularity of approximately 24 hours.
0042749	name:Name:regulation of circadian sleep/wake cycle	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the circadian sleep/wake cycle.
0042753	name:Name:positive regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:activation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:stimulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:up regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:up-regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:upregulation of circadian rhythm	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a circadian rhythm behavior.
0042754	name:Name:negative regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:down regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:down-regulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:downregulation of circadian rhythm	name:Synonym:inhibition of circadian rhythm	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a circadian rhythm behavior.
0043609	name:Name:regulation of carbon utilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of carbon utilization.
0043610	name:Name:regulation of carbohydrate utilization	name:Synonym:regulation of sugar utilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of carbohydrate utilization.
0043900	name:Name:regulation of multi-organism process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a multi-organism process, a process in which an organism has an effect on another organism of the same or different species.
0002759	name:Name:regulation of antimicrobial humoral response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of an antimicrobial humoral response.
0010112	name:Name:regulation of systemic acquired resistance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of systemic acquired resistance.
0031664	name:Name:regulation of lipopolysaccharide-mediated signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of lipopolysaccharide-mediated signalling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of LPS-mediated signaling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of signaling in response to detection of lipopolysaccharide.
0043901	name:Name:negative regulation of multi-organism process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a multi-organism process, a process in which an organism has an effect on another organism of the same or different species.
0043902	name:Name:positive regulation of multi-organism process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a multi-organism process, a process in which an organism has an effect on another organism of the same or different species.
0043903	name:Name:regulation of symbiosis, encompassing mutualism through parasitism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of symbiosis, an interaction between two organisms living together in more or less intimate association.
0045304	name:Name:regulation of establishment of competence for transformation	name:Synonym:regulator of establishment of competence for transformation activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process in which a cell becomes able to take up and incorporate extracellular DNA into its genome.
0046999	name:Name:regulation of conjugation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or frequency of conjugation, the union or introduction of genetic information from compatible mating types that results in a genetically different individual.
0050688	name:Name:regulation of defense response to virus	name:Synonym:regulation of antiviral response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the antiviral response of a cell or organism.
0060256	name:Name:regulation of flocculation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the non-sexual aggregation of single-celled organisms.
0060405	name:Name:regulation of penile erection	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of penile erection. Penile erection is the hardening, enlarging and rising of the penis which often occurs in the sexually aroused male and enables sexual intercourse. Achieved by increased inflow of blood into the vessels of erectile tissue, and decreased outflow.
0061058	name:Name:regulation of peptidoglycan recognition protein signaling pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of peptidoglycan recognition protein signalling pathway	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the peptidoglycan recognition protein signaling pathway.
0061094	name:Name:regulation of turning behavior involved in mating	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of turning behavior involved in mating. Turning behavior is the sharp ventral turn performed by the male as he approaches either the hermaphrodite head or tail, whilst trying to locate his partner's vulva. Turning occurs via a sharp ventral coil of the male's tail.
0080092	name:Name:regulation of pollen tube growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of pollen tube growth.
2000068	name:Name:regulation of defense response to insect	name:Synonym:regulation of physiological defense response to insect	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of defense response to insect.
2000072	name:Name:regulation of defense response to fungus, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of defence response to fungus, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of defence response to pathogenic fungi, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of defence response to pathogenic fungus, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of defense response to fungi, incompatible interaction	name:Synonym:regulation of resistance response to pathogenic fungi	name:Synonym:regulation of resistance response to pathogenic fungus	name:Synonym:regulation of response to pathogenic fungi (incompatible interaction)	name:Synonym:regulation of response to pathogenic fungus (incompatible interaction)	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of defense response to fungus, incompatible interaction.
0044087	name:Name:regulation of cellular component biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular component biogenesis, a process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a cellular component.
0007317	name:Name:regulation of pole plasm oskar mRNA localization	name:Synonym:regulation of oocyte pole plasm oskar mRNA localization	name:Synonym:regulation of pole plasm oskar mRNA localisation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process in which oskar mRNA is transported to, or maintained in, the oocyte pole plasm.
0010603	name:Name:regulation of cytoplasmic mRNA processing body assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of proteins and RNA molecules to form a cytoplasmic mRNA processing body.
0010847	name:Name:regulation of chromatin assembly	info:Definition:Any process the modulates the frequency, rate or extent of chromatin assembly. Chromatin assembly is the assembly of DNA, histone proteins, and other associated proteins into chromatin structure, beginning with the formation of the basic unit, the nucleosome, followed by organization of the nucleosomes into higher order structures, ultimately giving rise to a complex organization of specific domains within the nucleus.
0032231	name:Name:regulation of actin filament bundle assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of actin cable assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of actin filament bundle formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the assembly of actin filament bundles.
0032884	name:Name:regulation of cell wall chitin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall chitin anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall chitin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall chitin formation	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall chitin synthesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of cell wall chitin.
0032955	name:Name:regulation of barrier septum formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of barrier septum formation. Barrier septum formation is the assembly and arrangement of a septum that spans the plasma membrane interface between progeny cells following cytokinesis.
0032995	name:Name:regulation of fungal-type cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of chitin- and beta-glucan-containing cell wall biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the process in which a cell wall is synthesized, aggregates, and bonds together. The fungal-type cell wall contains beta-glucan and may contain chitin.
0043254	name:Name:regulation of protein complex assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of protein complex assembly.
0044089	name:Name:positive regulation of cellular component biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of cellular component biogenesis, a process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a cellular component.
0051963	name:Name:regulation of synapse assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of synapse biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of synaptogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of synapse assembly, the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a synapse.
0060297	name:Name:regulation of sarcomere organization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent myofibril assembly by organization of muscle actomyosin into sarcomeres. The sarcomere is the repeating unit of a myofibril in a muscle cell, composed of an array of overlapping thick and thin filaments between two adjacent Z discs.
0060491	name:Name:regulation of cell projection assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of cell projection formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of cell projection assembly.
0070608	name:Name:regulation of cell wall 1,3-alpha-glucan biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall 1,3-alpha-glucan anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall 1,3-alpha-glucan biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall 1,3-alpha-glucan formation	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall 1,3-alpha-glucan synthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall alpha-1,3-glucan anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall alpha-1,3-glucan biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall alpha-1,3-glucan biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall alpha-1,3-glucan formation	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall alpha-1,3-glucan synthesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of 1,3-alpha-glucans, compounds composed of glucose residues linked by 1,3-alpha-D-glucosidic bonds, found in the walls of cells.
0071342	name:Name:regulation of establishment of contractile ring localization involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:regulation of establishment of contractile ring localisation involved in cell cycle cytokinesis	name:Synonym:regulation of establishment of contractile ring localization involved in cytokinesis during cell cycle	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process in which a contractile ring is assembled in a specific location that contributes to cytokinesis during cell cycle.
0090069	name:Name:regulation of ribosome biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of ribosome biogenesis. Ribosome biogenesis is the cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of ribosome subunits.
0090083	name:Name:regulation of inclusion body assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of inclusion body assembly. Inclusion body assembly is the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form an inclusion body.
0090107	name:Name:regulation of high-density lipoprotein particle assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of high-density lipoprotein particle assembly. High-density lipoprotein particle assembly is the aggregation and arrangement of proteins and lipids to form a high-density lipoprotein particle.
0090109	name:Name:regulation of cell-substrate junction assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of cell-substrate junction assembly. Cell-substrate junction assembly is the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a junction between a cell and its substrate.
0090153	name:Name:regulation of sphingolipid biosynthetic process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of sphingolipid biosynthesis. Sphingolipid biosynthesis is the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of sphingolipids, any of a class of lipids containing the long-chain amine diol sphingosine or a closely related base (a sphingoid).
0090169	name:Name:regulation of spindle assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of spindle formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of spindle assembly. Spindle assembly is the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form the spindle, the array of microtubules and associated molecules that serves to move duplicated chromosomes apart.
0090173	name:Name:regulation of synaptonemal complex assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of synaptonemal complex assembly. Synaptonemal complex assembly is the cell cycle process in which the synaptonemal complex, a structure that holds paired chromosomes together during prophase I of meiosis and that promotes genetic recombination, is formed.
0090230	name:Name:regulation of centromere complex assembly	name:Synonym:centromere licensing	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of centromere complex assembly, the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of proteins and centromeric DNA molecules to form a centromeric protein-DNA complex.
2000431	name:Name:regulation of cytokinesis, actomyosin contractile ring assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of contractile ring assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cytokinesis, actomyosin contractile ring assembly.
2000652	name:Name:regulation of secondary cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of cellulose and pectin-containing secondary cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of plant-type secondary cell wall biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of secondary cell wall anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of secondary cell wall biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of secondary cell wall formation	name:Synonym:regulation of secondary cell wall synthesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of secondary cell wall biogenesis.
2000705	name:Name:regulation of dense core granule biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of dense core granule biogenesis.
2000785	name:Name:regulation of autophagic vacuole assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of autophagic vacuole formation	name:Synonym:regulation of autophagosome biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of autophagosome formation	name:Synonym:regulation of PAS formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of autophagic vacuole assembly.
2000810	name:Name:regulation of tight junction assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of tight junction formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of tight junction assembly.
0045767	name:Name:regulation of anti-apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of anti-apoptosis.
0019987	name:Name:negative regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:down regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:down-regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:downregulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:inhibition of anti-apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of anti-apoptosis.
0045768	name:Name:positive regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:activation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:stimulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:up regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:up-regulation of anti-apoptosis	name:Synonym:upregulation of anti-apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of anti-apoptosis.
0048518	name:Name:positive regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:activation of biological process	name:Synonym:positive regulation of physiological process	name:Synonym:stimulation of biological process	name:Synonym:up regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:upregulation of biological process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a biological process. Biological processes are regulated by many means; examples include the control of gene expression, protein modification or interaction with a protein or substrate molecule.
0010884	name:Name:positive regulation of lipid storage	name:Synonym:positive regulation of lipid sequestration	info:Definition:Any process that increases the rate, frequency or extent of lipid storage. Lipid storage is the accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of lipids, compounds soluble in organic solvents but insoluble or sparingly soluble in aqueous solvents. Lipid reserves can be accumulated during early developmental stages for mobilization and utilization at later stages of development.
0030711	name:Name:positive regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:activation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:positive regulation of border cell delamination	name:Synonym:stimulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:up regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:up-regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:upregulation of border follicle cell delamination	info:Definition:Any process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of border cell delamination.
0046726	name:Name:positive regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:activation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:positive regulation of viral protein levels	name:Synonym:stimulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:up regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:up-regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:upregulation of viral protein levels in host cell	info:Definition:Any process that increases the levels of viral proteins in a cell.
0048522	name:Name:positive regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:activation of cellular process	name:Synonym:positive regulation of cellular physiological process	name:Synonym:stimulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:up regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:upregulation of cellular process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a cellular process, any of those that are carried out at the cellular level, but are not necessarily restricted to a single cell. For example, cell communication occurs among more than one cell, but occurs at the cellular level.
0048524	name:Name:positive regulation of viral reproduction	name:Synonym:activation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:stimulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:up regulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:up-regulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:upregulation of viral life cycle	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the viral life cycle, the set of processes by which a virus reproduces and spreads among hosts.
0048584	name:Name:positive regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:activation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:stimulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:up regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:up-regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:upregulation of response to stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that activates, maintains or increases the rate of a response to a stimulus. Response to stimulus is a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus.
0051050	name:Name:positive regulation of transport	name:Synonym:activation of transport	name:Synonym:stimulation of transport	name:Synonym:up regulation of transport	name:Synonym:up-regulation of transport	name:Synonym:upregulation of transport	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051094	name:Name:positive regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:activation of developmental process	name:Synonym:stimulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:up regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:upregulation of developmental process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of development, the biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of an organism over time from an initial condition (e.g. a zygote, or a young adult) to a later condition (e.g. a multicellular animal or an aged adult).
0051130	name:Name:positive regulation of cellular component organization	name:Synonym:activation of cell organization	name:Synonym:positive regulation of cell organisation	name:Synonym:positive regulation of cellular component organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:stimulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:up regulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:up-regulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:upregulation of cell organization	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of a process involved in the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cell structures, including the plasma membrane and any external encapsulating structures such as the cell wall and cell envelope.
0051240	name:Name:positive regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:activation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:stimulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:up regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:up-regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:upregulation of multicellular organismal process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of an organismal process, any of the processes pertinent to the function of an organism above the cellular level; includes the integrated processes of tissues and organs.
0051284	name:Name:positive regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:activation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:positive regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) retention	name:Synonym:positive regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestering	name:Synonym:positive regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestration	name:Synonym:positive regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) storage	name:Synonym:positive regulation of retention of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:positive regulation of sequestering of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:positive regulation of sequestration of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:positive regulation of storage of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:stimulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:up regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:up-regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:upregulation of sequestering of calcium ion	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of the binding or confining calcium ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0051919	name:Name:positive regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:activation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:stimulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:up regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:up-regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:upregulation of fibrinolysis	info:Definition:Any process that activates, maintains or increases the frequency, rate or extent of fibrinolysis, an ongoing process that solubilizes fibrin, resulting in the removal of small blood clots.
0061090	name:Name:positive regulation of sequestering of zinc ion	info:Definition:Any process that increases the rate, frequency, or extent of sequestering of zinc ion. Sequestering of zinc ion is the process of binding or confining zinc ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0090232	name:Name:positive regulation of spindle checkpoint	name:Synonym:spindle checkpoint activation	info:Definition:Any process that increases the rate, frequency, or extent of the spindle checkpoint, a cell cycle checkpoint that delays the metaphase/anaphase transition until the spindle is correctly assembled and oriented, and chromosomes are attached to the spindle.
2000243	name:Name:positive regulation of reproductive process	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of reproductive process.
2000386	name:Name:positive regulation of ovarian follicle development	name:Synonym:positive regulation of follicular phase	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of ovarian follicle development.
2000729	name:Name:positive regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in ureter development	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ureter mesenchymal cell proliferation	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ureteral mesenchymal cell proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in ureter development.
2000748	name:Name:positive regulation of defecation rhythm	name:Synonym:positive regulation of defecation behavior	name:Synonym:positive regulation of defecation cycle	name:Synonym:positive regulation of defecation motor program	name:Synonym:positive regulation of DMP	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of defecation rhythm.
2000792	name:Name:positive regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development.
0048519	name:Name:negative regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:down regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of biological process	name:Synonym:downregulation of biological process	name:Synonym:inhibition of biological process	name:Synonym:negative regulation of physiological process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a biological process. Biological processes are regulated by many means; examples include the control of gene expression, protein modification or interaction with a protein or substrate molecule.
0010888	name:Name:negative regulation of lipid storage	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of lipid storage. Lipid storage is the accumulation and maintenance in cells or tissues of lipids, compounds soluble in organic solvents but insoluble or sparingly soluble in aqueous solvents. Lipid reserves can be accumulated during early developmental stages for mobilization and utilization at later stages of development.
0030712	name:Name:negative regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:down regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:down-regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:downregulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:inhibition of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:negative regulation of border cell delamination	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the frequency, rate or extent of border cell delamination.
0046725	name:Name:negative regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:down regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:down-regulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:downregulation of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:inhibition of viral protein levels in host cell	name:Synonym:negative regulation of viral protein levels	info:Definition:Any process that reduces the levels of viral proteins in a cell.
0048523	name:Name:negative regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:down regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:downregulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:inhibition of cellular process	name:Synonym:negative regulation of cellular physiological process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a cellular process, any of those that are carried out at the cellular level, but are not necessarily restricted to a single cell. For example, cell communication occurs among more than one cell, but occurs at the cellular level.
0048525	name:Name:negative regulation of viral reproduction	name:Synonym:down regulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:down-regulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:downregulation of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:inhibition of viral life cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of viral life cycle	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the viral life cycle, the set of processes by which a virus reproduces and spreads among hosts.
0048585	name:Name:negative regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:down regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:down-regulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:downregulation of response to stimulus	name:Synonym:inhibition of response to stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a response to a stimulus. Response to stimulus is a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus.
0051051	name:Name:negative regulation of transport	name:Synonym:down regulation of transport	name:Synonym:down-regulation of transport	name:Synonym:downregulation of transport	name:Synonym:inhibition of transport	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of substances (such as macromolecules, small molecules, ions) into, out of or within a cell, or between cells, by means of some agent such as a transporter or pore.
0051093	name:Name:negative regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:down regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:downregulation of developmental process	name:Synonym:inhibition of developmental process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the rate or extent of development, the biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of an organism over time from an initial condition (e.g. a zygote, or a young adult) to a later condition (e.g. a multicellular animal or an aged adult).
0051129	name:Name:negative regulation of cellular component organization	name:Synonym:down regulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:down-regulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:downregulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:inhibition of cell organization	name:Synonym:negative regulation of cell organisation	name:Synonym:negative regulation of cellular component organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of a process involved in the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cell structures, including the plasma membrane and any external encapsulating structures such as the cell wall and cell envelope.
0051241	name:Name:negative regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:down regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:down-regulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:downregulation of multicellular organismal process	name:Synonym:inhibition of multicellular organismal process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of an organismal process, the processes pertinent to the function of an organism above the cellular level; includes the integrated processes of tissues and organs.
0051283	name:Name:negative regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:down regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:down-regulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:downregulation of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:inhibition of sequestering of calcium ion	name:Synonym:negative regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) retention	name:Synonym:negative regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestering	name:Synonym:negative regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) sequestration	name:Synonym:negative regulation of calcium ion (Ca2+) storage	name:Synonym:negative regulation of retention of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:negative regulation of sequestering of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:negative regulation of sequestration of calcium ion (Ca2+)	name:Synonym:negative regulation of storage of calcium ion (Ca2+)	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the binding or confining calcium ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0051918	name:Name:negative regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:down regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:down-regulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:downregulation of fibrinolysis	name:Synonym:inhibition of fibrinolysis	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of fibrinolysis, an ongoing process that solubilizes fibrin, resulting in the removal of small blood clots.
0061089	name:Name:negative regulation of sequestering of zinc ion	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the rate, frequency, or extent of sequestering of zinc ion. Sequestering of zinc ion is the process of binding or confining zinc ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0090233	name:Name:negative regulation of spindle checkpoint	name:Synonym:spindle checkpoint silencing	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the rate, frequency, or extent of the spindle checkpoint, a cell cycle checkpoint that delays the metaphase/anaphase transition until the spindle is correctly assembled and oriented, and chromosomes are attached to the spindle.
2000242	name:Name:negative regulation of reproductive process	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of reproductive process.
2000355	name:Name:negative regulation of ovarian follicle development	name:Synonym:negative regulation of follicular phase	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of ovarian follicle development.
2000747	name:Name:negative regulation of defecation rhythm	name:Synonym:negative regulation of defecation behavior	name:Synonym:negative regulation of defecation cycle	name:Synonym:negative regulation of defecation motor program	name:Synonym:negative regulation of DMP	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of defecation rhythm.
2000791	name:Name:negative regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development.
2000795	name:Name:negative regulation of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis.
2000818	name:Name:negative regulation of myoblast proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of myoblast proliferation.
0048583	name:Name:regulation of response to stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a response to a stimulus. Response to stimulus is a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus.
0002831	name:Name:regulation of response to biotic stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of a response to biotic stimulus.
0031383	name:Name:regulation of mating projection assembly	name:Synonym:regulation of mating projection biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of mating projection formation by unicellular fungi.
0032101	name:Name:regulation of response to external stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a response to an external stimulus.
0045147	name:Name:regulation of initiation of acetate catabolic process by acetate	name:Synonym:regulation of initiation of acetate breakdown by acetate	name:Synonym:regulation of initiation of acetate degradation by acetate	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the activation, by acetate, of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the breakdown of acetate.
0050795	name:Name:regulation of behavior	name:Synonym:regulation of behaviour	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of behavior, the specific actions or reactions of an organism in response to external or internal stimuli.
0060759	name:Name:regulation of response to cytokine stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of a response to cytokine stimulus.
0070920	name:Name:regulation of production of small RNA involved in gene silencing by RNA	name:Synonym:regulation of gene silencing by RNA, production of guide RNA	name:Synonym:regulation of gene silencing by RNA, production of small RNA	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the production of small RNA involved in gene silencing by RNA.
0080134	name:Name:regulation of response to stress	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a response to stress. Response to stress is a change in state or activity of a cell or an organism (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a disturbance in organismal or cellular homeostasis, usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0090287	name:Name:regulation of cellular response to growth factor stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a growth factor stimulus.
2000028	name:Name:regulation of photoperiodism, flowering	name:Synonym:regulation of photoperiodic control of flowering time	name:Synonym:regulation of photoperiodic control of inflorescence development	name:Synonym:regulation of response to day length, flowering	name:Synonym:regulation of response to night length, flowering	name:Synonym:regulation of response to photoperiod, flowering	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of photoperiodism, flowering.
2000030	name:Name:regulation of response to red or far red light	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of response to red or far red light.
2000257	name:Name:regulation of protein activation cascade	name:Synonym:regulation of protein activation pathway	name:Synonym:regulation of protein activitory cascade	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of protein activation cascade.
2000498	name:Name:regulation of induction of apoptosis in response to chemical stimulus	name:Synonym:regulation of induction of apoptosis in response to chemical substance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of induction of apoptosis in response to chemical stimulus.
2000654	name:Name:regulation of cellular response to testosterone stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular response to testosterone stimulus.
2000683	name:Name:regulation of cellular response to X-ray	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular response to X-ray radiation stimulus	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular response to X-ray.
2000970	name:Name:regulation of detection of glucose	name:Synonym:regulation of glucose detection	name:Synonym:regulation of glucose perception	name:Synonym:regulation of glucose sensing	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of detection of glucose.
0050792	name:Name:regulation of viral reproduction	name:Synonym:regulation of viral life cycle	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or extent of the viral life cycle, the set of processes by which a virus reproduces and spreads among hosts.
0045069	name:Name:regulation of viral genome replication	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of viral genome replication.
0046782	name:Name:regulation of viral transcription	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the transcription of the viral genome.
0050793	name:Name:regulation of developmental process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of development, the biological process whose specific outcome is the progression of a multicellular organism over time from an initial condition (e.g. a zygote, or a young adult) to a later condition (e.g. a multicellular animal or an aged adult).
0022603	name:Name:regulation of anatomical structure morphogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of anatomical structure morphogenesis.
0040034	name:Name:regulation of development, heterochronic	name:Synonym:developmental timing	name:Synonym:heterochronic regulation of development	name:Synonym:temporal regulation of development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the progression an integrated living unit: an anatomical structure (which may be a subcellular structure, cell, tissue, or organ), or organism over time from an initial condition to a later condition at a consistent predetermined time point during its development.
0043937	name:Name:regulation of sporulation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of sporulation, the process whose specific outcome is the progression of a spore over time, from its initiation to the mature structure.
0044127	name:Name:regulation of development of symbiont in host	info:Definition:Any process in which the symbiont regulates its progression from an initial condition to a later condition, within the cells or tissues of the host organism. This may (but not necessarily) include a filamentous growth form, and also can include secretion of proteases and lipases to break down. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in the symbiotic interaction.
0044145	name:Name:modulation of development of symbiont involved in interaction with host	name:Synonym:modulation of development of symbiont during interaction with host	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the progression of an organism from an initial condition to a later condition, occurring in, on or near the exterior of its host organism.
0045595	name:Name:regulation of cell differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell differentiation, the process in which relatively unspecialized cells acquire specialized structural and functional features.
0048070	name:Name:regulation of developmental pigmentation	name:Synonym:regulation of pigmentation during development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the developmental process that results in the deposition of coloring matter in an organism.
0090342	name:Name:regulation of cell aging	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of cell aging. Cell aging is the progression of the cell from its inception to the end of its lifespan.
2000026	name:Name:regulation of multicellular organismal development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of multicellular organismal development.
2000380	name:Name:regulation of mesoderm development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of mesoderm development.
2000383	name:Name:regulation of ectoderm development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ectoderm development.
2000742	name:Name:regulation of anterior head development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of anterior head development.
2000772	name:Name:regulation of cellular senescence	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cellular senescence.
2000787	name:Name:regulation of venous endothelial cell fate commitment	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of venous endothelial cell fate commitment.
0050794	name:Name:regulation of cellular process	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular physiological process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a cellular process, any of those that are carried out at the cellular level, but are not necessarily restricted to a single cell. For example, cell communication occurs among more than one cell, but occurs at the cellular level.
0003254	name:Name:regulation of membrane depolarization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of membrane depolarization. Membrane depolarization is the process in which membrane potential changes in the depolarizing direction from the resting potential, usually from negative to positive.
0010119	name:Name:regulation of stomatal movement	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of stomatal movement.
0010522	name:Name:regulation of calcium ion transport into cytosol	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate of the directed movement of calcium ions into the cytosol of a cell. The cytosol is that part of the cytoplasm that does not contain membranous or particulate subcellular components.
0010528	name:Name:regulation of transposition	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of transposition. Transposition results in the movement of discrete segments of DNA between nonhomologous sites.
0010549	name:Name:regulation of membrane disassembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of membrane disassembly.
0010646	name:Name:regulation of cell communication	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell communication. Cell communication is the process that mediates interactions between a cell and its surroundings. Encompasses interactions such as signaling or attachment between one cell and another cell, between a cell and an extracellular matrix, or between a cell and any other aspect of its environment.
0010715	name:Name:regulation of extracellular matrix disassembly	name:Synonym:regulation of extracellular matrix breakdown	name:Synonym:regulation of extracellular matrix degradation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of extracellular matrix disassembly. Extracellular matrix disassembly is a process that results in the breakdown of the extracellular matrix.
0010941	name:Name:regulation of cell death	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or frequency of cell death. Cell death is the specific activation or halting of processes within a cell so that its vital functions markedly cease, rather than simply deteriorating gradually over time, which culminates in cell death.
0022604	name:Name:regulation of cell morphogenesis	name:Synonym:negative regulation of cell shape and cell size	name:Synonym:positive regulation of cell shape and cell size	name:Synonym:regulation of cell shape and cell size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell morphogenesis. Cell morphogenesis is the developmental process in which the shape of a cell is generated and organized.
0030155	name:Name:regulation of cell adhesion	name:Synonym:cell adhesion receptor regulator activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of attachment of a cell to another cell or to the extracellular matrix.
0031344	name:Name:regulation of cell projection organization	name:Synonym:regulation of cell projection organisation	name:Synonym:regulation of cell projection organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a process involved in the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cell projections.
0032271	name:Name:regulation of protein polymerization	name:Synonym:regulation of protein polymerisation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process of creating protein polymers.
0032847	name:Name:regulation of cellular pH reduction	name:Synonym:regulation of cell pH reduction	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular acidification	name:Synonym:regulation of intracellular acidification	name:Synonym:regulation of intracellular pH reduction	name:Synonym:regulation of reduction of cellular pH	name:Synonym:regulation of reduction of pH in cell	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of a process that reduces the internal pH of a cell.
0032878	name:Name:regulation of establishment or maintenance of cell polarity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the specification, formation or maintenance of anisotropic intracellular organization or cell growth patterns.
0032886	name:Name:regulation of microtubule-based process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of any cellular process that depends upon or alters the microtubule cytoskeleton.
0032970	name:Name:regulation of actin filament-based process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of any cellular process that depends upon or alters the actin cytoskeleton.
0033043	name:Name:regulation of organelle organization	name:Synonym:regulation of organelle organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a process involved in the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an organelle.
0034306	name:Name:regulation of sexual sporulation	name:Synonym:MAPKKK cascade during sporulation	name:Synonym:regulation of meiotic spore formation	name:Synonym:regulation of meiotic sporulation	name:Synonym:regulation of sexual spore formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of spore formation from the products of meiosis. An example of this is found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
0034762	name:Name:regulation of transmembrane transport	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of a solute from one side of a membrane to the other.
0042127	name:Name:regulation of cell proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell proliferation.
0043012	name:Name:regulation of fusion of sperm to egg plasma membrane	name:Synonym:regulation of sperm-oocyte fusion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the binding and fusion of a sperm to the oocyte plasma membrane.
0044068	name:Name:modulation by symbiont of host cellular process	name:Synonym:modulation of host cellular process by symbiont	name:Synonym:regulation by symbiont of host cellular process 	name:Synonym:regulation of host cellular process by symbiont	info:Definition:Any process in which a symbiont organism modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a cellular process, any process that is carried out at the cellular level, but not necessarily restricted to a single cell, in its host organism.
0045113	name:Name:regulation of integrin biosynthetic process	name:Synonym:regulation of integrin anabolism	name:Synonym:regulation of integrin biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of integrin formation	name:Synonym:regulation of integrin synthesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of integrins.
0050807	name:Name:regulation of synapse organization	name:Synonym:regulation of synapse organization and biogenesis	name:Synonym:regulation of synapse structure	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the physical form of a synapse, the junction between a neuron and a target (neuron, muscle, or secretory cell).
0050865	name:Name:regulation of cell activation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of cell activation, the change in the morphology or behavior of a cell resulting from exposure to an activating factor such as a cellular or soluble ligand.
0051302	name:Name:regulation of cell division	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the physical partitioning and separation of a cell into daughter cells.
0051726	name:Name:regulation of cell cycle	name:Synonym:cell cycle control	name:Synonym:cell cycle modulation	name:Synonym:cell cycle regulation	name:Synonym:cell cycle regulator	name:Synonym:control of cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:modulation of cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:regulation of cell cycle progression	name:Synonym:regulation of progression through cell cycle	name:Synonym:tumor suppressor	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or extent of progression through the cell cycle.
0051983	name:Name:regulation of chromosome segregation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of chromosome segregation, the process in which genetic material, in the form of chromosomes, is organized and then physically separated and apportioned to two or more sets.
0060142	name:Name:regulation of syncytium formation by plasma membrane fusion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the formation of a syncytium, a mass of cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed within a single plasma membrane, by the fusion of the plasma membranes of two or more individual cells.
0060237	name:Name:regulation of fungal-type cell wall organization	name:Synonym:regulation of fungal-type cell wall organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the fungal-type cell wall.
0060353	name:Name:regulation of cell adhesion molecule production	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of cell adhesion molecule production. Cell adhesion molecule production is the appearance of a cell adhesion molecule as a result of its biosynthesis or a decrease in its catabolism.
0060627	name:Name:regulation of vesicle-mediated transport	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of vesicle-mediated transport, the directed movement of substances, either within a vesicle or in the vesicle membrane, into, out of or within a cell.
0060968	name:Name:regulation of gene silencing	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of gene silencing, the transcriptional or post-transcriptional process carried out at the cellular level that results in long-term gene inactivation.
0061091	name:Name:regulation of phospholipid translocation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the translocation, or flipping, of phospholipid molecules from one monolayer of a membrane bilayer to the opposite monolayer.
0075049	name:Name:modulation of symbiont cell wall strengthening involved in entry into host	name:Synonym:modulation of symbiont cell wall strengthening during entry into host	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of symbiont cell wall strengthening during entry into host. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0080135	name:Name:regulation of cellular response to stress	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a cellular response to stress. Cellular response to stress is a change in state or activity of a cell (in terms of movement, secretion, enzyme production, gene expression, etc.) as a result of a stimulus indicating the organism is under stress. The stress is usually, but not necessarily, exogenous (e.g. temperature, humidity, ionizing radiation).
0080157	name:Name:regulation of plant-type cell wall organization or biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving plant-type cell wall organization or biogenesis. Plant-type cell wall organization or biogenesis is a process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellulose- and pectin-containing cell wall.
0090034	name:Name:regulation of cellular chaperone-mediated protein complex assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of cellular chaperone-mediated protein complex assembly. Cellular chaperone-mediated protein complex assembly is the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a protein complex, occurring at the level of an individual cell, mediated by chaperone molecules that do not form part of the finished complex.
0090364	name:Name:regulation of proteasome assembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a mature, active proteasome complex.
2000325	name:Name:regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity	name:Synonym:regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription co-activator activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity.
2000359	name:Name:regulation of binding of sperm to zona pellucida	name:Synonym:regulation of ZPG binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of binding of sperm to the zona pellucida.
2000709	name:Name:regulation of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion, centromeric	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of centromeric meiotic sister chromatin cohesion	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatin cohesion at centromere	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of sister chromatin cohesion at centromere at meiosis I	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion in the centromeric region.
2000712	name:Name:regulation of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion, arms	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatin cohesion along arms	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of sister chromatin cohesion along arms at meiosis I	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of maintenance of meiotic sister chromatid cohesion along the chromosome arms.
2000715	name:Name:regulation of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion, arms	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatin cohesion along arms	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of sister chromatin cohesion along arms at mitosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion along the chromosome arms.
2000718	name:Name:regulation of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion, centromeric	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of centromeric mitotic sister chromatin cohesion	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatin cohesion at centromere	name:Synonym:regulation of maintenance of sister chromatin cohesion at centromere at mitosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of maintenance of mitotic sister chromatid cohesion in the centromeric region.
2000807	name:Name:regulation of synaptic vesicle clustering	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of synaptic vesicle clustering.
2000828	name:Name:regulation of parathyroid hormone secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of parathormone secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of parathyrin secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of PTH secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of parathyroid hormone secretion.
2000831	name:Name:regulation of steroid hormone secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of steroid hormone secretion.
0051128	name:Name:regulation of cellular component organization	name:Synonym:regulation of cell organisation	name:Synonym:regulation of cell organization	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular component organisation	name:Synonym:regulation of cellular component organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a process involved in the formation, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of cell structures, including the plasma membrane and any external encapsulating structures such as the cell wall and cell envelope.
0003330	name:Name:regulation of extracellular matrix constituent secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the controlled release of molecules that form the extracellular matrix, including carbohydrates and glycoproteins by a cell or a group of cells.
0010901	name:Name:regulation of very-low-density lipoprotein particle remodeling	name:Synonym:regulation of VLDL remodeling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of very-low-density lipoprotein particle remodeling. Very-low-density lipoprotein particle remodeling is the acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a very-low-density lipoprotein particle, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by hepatic lipase or lipoprotein lipase and the subsequent loss of free fatty acid.
0030100	name:Name:regulation of endocytosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of endocytosis.
0034222	name:Name:regulation of cell wall chitin metabolic process	name:Synonym:regulation of cell wall chitin metabolism	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the chemical reactions and pathways involving chitin in a cell wall.
0043244	name:Name:regulation of protein complex disassembly	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of protein complex disassembly, the disaggregation of a protein complex into its constituent components.
0090003	name:Name:regulation of establishment of protein localization in plasma membrane	name:Synonym:regulation of establishment of protein localisation in plasma membrane	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of a protein to a specific location in the plasma membrane.
0090318	name:Name:regulation of chylomicron remodeling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of chylomicron remodeling. Chylomicron remodeling is the acquisition, loss or modification of a protein or lipid within a chylomicron, including the hydrolysis of triglyceride by lipoprotein lipase and the subsequent loss of free fatty acid.
2000332	name:Name:regulation of blood microparticle formation	name:Synonym:regulation of microparticle generation	name:Synonym:regulation of microparticle release	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of blood microparticle formation.
2000812	name:Name:regulation of barbed-end actin filament capping	name:Synonym:regulation of barbed-end actin capping activity	name:Synonym:regulation of barbed-end F-actin capping activity	name:Synonym:regulation of plus-end actin filament capping activity	name:Synonym:regulation of plus-end F-actin capping activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of barbed-end actin filament capping.
0051239	name:Name:regulation of multicellular organismal process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a multicellular organismal process, the processes pertinent to the function of a multicellular organism above the cellular level; includes the integrated processes of tissues and organs.
0001817	name:Name:regulation of cytokine production	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of production of a cytokine.
0010632	name:Name:regulation of epithelial cell migration	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of epithelial cell migration.
0010984	name:Name:regulation of lipoprotein particle clearance	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of lipoprotein particle clearance. Lipoprotein particle clearance is the process in which a lipoprotein particle is removed from the blood via receptor-mediated endocytosis and its constituent parts degraded.
0030278	name:Name:regulation of ossification	name:Synonym:regulation of bone biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of bone formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of bone formation.
0030710	name:Name:regulation of border follicle cell delamination	name:Synonym:regulation of border cell delamination	info:Definition:Any process that regulates the frequency, rate or extent of border cell delamination.
0032899	name:Name:regulation of neurotrophin production	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of production of a neurotrophin.
0034103	name:Name:regulation of tissue remodeling	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate, or extent of tissue remodeling.
0035490	name:Name:regulation of leukotriene production involved in inflammatory response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of the synthesis or release of any leukotriene following a stimulus as part of an inflammatory response.
0042634	name:Name:regulation of hair cycle	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the cyclical phases of growth (anagen), regression (catagen), quiescence (telogen), and shedding (exogen) in the life of a hair.
0043576	name:Name:regulation of respiratory gaseous exchange	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the process of gaseous exchange between an organism and its environment.
0044057	name:Name:regulation of system process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a system process, a multicellular organismal process carried out by any of the organs or tissues in an organ system.
0045477	name:Name:regulation of nurse cell apoptosis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of nurse cell apoptosis.
0045700	name:Name:regulation of spermatid nuclear differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of spermatid nuclear differentiation.
0046662	name:Name:regulation of oviposition	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the deposition of eggs, either fertilized or not, upon a surface or into a medium.
0050818	name:Name:regulation of coagulation	name:Synonym:regulation of clotting	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of coagulation, the process in which a fluid solution, or part of it, changes into a solid or semisolid mass.
0060264	name:Name:regulation of respiratory burst involved in inflammatory response	name:Synonym:regulation of respiratory burst involved in acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of a phase of elevated metabolic activity, during which oxygen consumption increases made as a defense response ; this leads to the production, by an NADH dependent system, of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals.
0060278	name:Name:regulation of ovulation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of ovulation, the release of a mature ovum/oocyte from an ovary.
0060281	name:Name:regulation of oocyte development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or extent of the process whose specific outcome is the progression of an oocyte over time, from initial commitment of the cell to its specific fate, to the fully functional differentiated cell.
0060688	name:Name:regulation of morphogenesis of a branching structure	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of branching morphogenesis, the process in which the anatomical structures of branches are generated and organized.
0070255	name:Name:regulation of mucus secretion	name:Synonym:regulation of mucus production	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the regulated release of mucus from a cell or group of cells.
2000254	name:Name:regulation of male germ cell proliferation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of male germ cell proliferation.
2000520	name:Name:regulation of immunological synapse formation	name:Synonym:regulation of formation of immunological synapse	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of immunological synapse formation.
2000822	name:Name:regulation of behavioral fear response	name:Synonym:regulation of behavioural fear response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of behavioral fear response.
0051917	name:Name:regulation of fibrinolysis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of fibrinolysis, an ongoing process that solubilizes fibrin, resulting in the removal of small blood clots.
0071898	name:Name:regulation of estrogen receptor binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of estrogen receptor binding, interacting selectively with a an estrogen receptor.
0071899	name:Name:negative regulation of estrogen receptor binding	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of estrogen receptor binding, interacting selectively with an estrogen receptor.
0090231	name:Name:regulation of spindle checkpoint	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the spindle checkpoint, a cell cycle checkpoint that delays the metaphase/anaphase transition until the spindle is correctly assembled and oriented, and chromosomes are attached to the spindle.
0090266	name:Name:regulation of mitotic cell cycle spindle assembly checkpoint	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of the mitotic cell cycle spindle assembly checkpoint, a cell cycle checkpoint that delays the metaphase/anaphase transition of a mitotic nuclear division until the spindle is correctly assembled and chromosomes are attached to the spindle.
0097006	name:Name:regulation of plasma lipoprotein particle levels	name:Synonym:plasma lipoprotein particle homeostasis	info:Definition:Any process involved in the maintenance of internal levels of plasma lipoprotein particles within an organism.
2000241	name:Name:regulation of reproductive process	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of reproductive process.
0009909	name:Name:regulation of flower development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of flower development.
0010081	name:Name:regulation of inflorescence meristem growth	name:Synonym:regulation of inflorescence meristem size	info:Definition:Any process involved in maintaining the size and shape of an inflorescence meristem.
0031494	name:Name:regulation of mating type switching	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of mating type switching, the conversion of a single-cell organism from one mating type to another by the precise replacement of a DNA sequence at the expressed mating type locus with a copy of a sequence from a donor locus.
0045694	name:Name:regulation of embryo sac egg cell differentiation	name:Synonym:regulation of female gametophyte egg cell differentiation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of embryo sac egg cell differentiation.
0048088	name:Name:regulation of male pigmentation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of establishment of a pattern of pigment in males.
0048089	name:Name:regulation of female pigmentation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of establishment of a pattern of pigment in females.
0060046	name:Name:regulation of acrosome reaction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the acrosome reaction.
0060238	name:Name:regulation of signal transduction involved in conjugation with cellular fusion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of pheromone-dependent signal transduction during conjugation with cellular fusion, the series of molecular signals that bring about the relay, amplification or dampening of a signal generated in response to a cue, such as starvation or pheromone exposure, in organisms that undergo conjugation with cellular fusion.
0060685	name:Name:regulation of prostatic bud formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of prostatic bud formation, the morphogenetic process in which a region of the fetal urogenital sinus epithelium is specified to become the prostate, resulting in prostate bud outgrowth.
0060687	name:Name:regulation of branching involved in prostate gland morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of prostate gland branching, the process in which the branching structure of the prostate gland is generated and organized. A branch is a division or offshoot from a main stem.
0060768	name:Name:regulation of epithelial cell proliferation involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of epithelial cell proliferation that contributes to the progression of the prostate gland over time.
0060782	name:Name:regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in prostate gland development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of mesenchymal cell proliferation that contributes to the progression of the prostate gland over time. A mesenchymal cell is a cell that normally gives rise to other cells that are organized as three-dimensional masses, rather than sheets.
0075260	name:Name:regulation of spore-bearing organ development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of spore-bearing organ development, a process in which hyphae grow into special aggregates called fruiting bodies that produce new spores.
0080050	name:Name:regulation of seed development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of seed development.
0080154	name:Name:regulation of fertilization	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency or extent of fertilization. Fertilization is the union of gametes of opposite sexes during the process of sexual reproduction to form a zygote. It involves the fusion of the gametic nuclei (karyogamy) and cytoplasm (plasmogamy).
2000018	name:Name:regulation of male gonad development	name:Synonym:regulation of testicular development	name:Synonym:regulation of testis development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of male gonad development.
2000194	name:Name:regulation of female gonad development	name:Synonym:regulation of ovarian development	name:Synonym:regulation of ovary development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of female gonad development.
2000870	name:Name:regulation of progesterone secretion	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of progesterone secretion.
2000746	name:Name:regulation of defecation rhythm	name:Synonym:regulation of defecation behavior	name:Synonym:regulation of defecation cycle	name:Synonym:regulation of defecation motor program	name:Synonym:regulation of DMP	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of defecation rhythm.
2000790	name:Name:regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of mesenchymal cell proliferation involved in lung development.
2000794	name:Name:regulation of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis.
0060501	name:Name:positive regulation of epithelial cell proliferation involved in lung morphogenesis	info:Definition:Any process that increases the rate or frequency of epithelial cell proliferation that results in the lung attaining its shape.
0065008	name:Name:regulation of biological quality	name:Synonym:regulation of biological attribute	name:Synonym:regulation of biological characteristic	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a biological quality. A biological quality is a measurable attribute of an organism or part of an organism, such as size, mass, shape, color, etc.
0001505	name:Name:regulation of neurotransmitter levels	info:Definition:Any process that modulates levels of neurotransmitter.
0042137	name:Name:sequestering of neurotransmitter	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter biosynthesis and storage	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter biosynthetic process and storage	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter retention	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter sequestration	name:Synonym:neurotransmitter storage	name:Synonym:retention of neurotransmitter	name:Synonym:sequestration of neurotransmitter	name:Synonym:storage of neurotransmitter	info:Definition:The process of binding or confining a neurotransmitter such that it is separated from other components of a biological system.
0002026	name:Name:regulation of the force of heart contraction	name:Synonym:cardiac inotropy	name:Synonym:heart inotropy	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the extent of heart contraction, changing the force with which blood is propelled.
0003057	name:Name:regulation of the force of heart contraction by chemical signal	name:Synonym:chemical cardiac inotropy	name:Synonym:regulation of the force of heart muscle contraction by chemical signal	info:Definition:The regulation of the force of heart muscle contraction mediated by chemical signaling, hormonal, autocrine or paracrine.
0002027	name:Name:regulation of heart rate	name:Synonym:cardiac chronotropy	name:Synonym:regulation of heart contraction rate	name:Synonym:regulation of rate of heart contraction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency or rate of heart contraction.
0003062	name:Name:regulation of heart rate by chemical signal	name:Synonym:chemical cardiac chronotropy	name:Synonym:chemical signal regulation of heart contraction rate	name:Synonym:chemical signal regulation of heart rate	info:Definition:The regulation of the rate of heart contraction mediated by chemical signaling, hormonal, autocrine or paracrine.
0010459	name:Name:negative regulation of heart rate	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency or rate of heart contraction.
0010460	name:Name:positive regulation of heart rate	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency or rate of heart contraction.
0006450	name:Name:regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:regulation of translational accuracy	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the ability of the translational apparatus to interpret the genetic code.
0045902	name:Name:negative regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:down regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:downregulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:inhibition of translational fidelity	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the ability of the translational apparatus to interpret the genetic code.
0045903	name:Name:positive regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:activation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:stimulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:up regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of translational fidelity	name:Synonym:upregulation of translational fidelity	info:Definition:Any process that increases the ability of the translational apparatus to interpret the genetic code.
0008217	name:Name:regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:blood pressure homeostasis	name:Synonym:blood pressure regulation	name:Synonym:control of blood pressure	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the force with which blood travels through the circulatory system. The process is controlled by a balance of processes that increase pressure and decrease pressure.
0003073	name:Name:regulation of systemic arterial blood pressure	info:Definition:The process that modulates the force with which blood travels through the systemic arterial circulatory system. The process is controlled by a balance of processes that increase pressure and decrease pressure.
0014916	name:Name:regulation of lung blood pressure	name:Synonym:regulation of pulmonary blood pressure	info:Definition:The process that modulates the force with which blood travels through the lungs. The process is controlled by a balance of processes that increase pressure and decrease pressure.
0045776	name:Name:negative regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:down regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:down-regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:downregulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:inhibition of blood pressure	info:Definition:Any process in which the force of blood traveling through the circulatory system is decreased.
0045777	name:Name:positive regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:activation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:stimulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:up regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:up-regulation of blood pressure	name:Synonym:upregulation of blood pressure	info:Definition:Any process in which the force of blood traveling through the circulatory system is increased.
0008360	name:Name:regulation of cell shape	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the surface configuration of a cell.
0000903	name:Name:regulation of cell shape during vegetative growth phase	name:Synonym:cell morphogenesis during vegetative growth phase	name:Synonym:cellular morphogenesis during vegetative growth	name:Synonym:regulation of cell morphogenesis during vegetative growth phase	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the surface configuration of a cell during the vegetative growth phase. The vegetative growth phase is the growth phase during which single celled organisms reproduce by budding or other asexual methods.
0016476	name:Name:regulation of embryonic cell shape	name:Synonym:shape changes of embryonic cells	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the surface configuration of an embryonic cell.
0061389	name:Name:regulation of direction of cell growth	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the direction of cell growth.
0010817	name:Name:regulation of hormone levels	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the levels of hormone within an organism or a tissue. A hormone is any substance formed in very small amounts in one specialized organ or group of cells and carried (sometimes in the bloodstream) to another organ or group of cells in the same organism, upon which it has a specific regulatory action.
0002002	name:Name:regulation of angiotensin levels in blood	name:Synonym:control of angiotensin levels in blood	name:Synonym:control of blood angiotensin level	name:Synonym:regulation of blood angiotensin level	info:Definition:The process that modulates the level of angiotensin in the blood by balancing the maturation of renin substrate to mature angiotensin and the catabolism of mature angiotensin.
0014729	name:Name:regulation of the velocity of shortening of skeletal muscle modulating contraction	name:Synonym:regulation of the velocity of shortening of skeletal muscle during contraction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates velocity of shortening of a skeletal muscle contraction. The shortening leads to reduction of the length of muscle fibers and sarcomeres.
0014882	name:Name:regulation of myofibril number	name:Synonym:change of myofibril number	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the number of myofibrils. A myofibril is the contractile element of skeletal and cardiac muscle. It is a long, highly organized bundle of actin, myosin, and other proteins that contracts by a sliding filament mechanism.
0031157	name:Name:regulation of aggregate size involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:regulation of aggregation during fruiting body biosynthesis	name:Synonym:regulation of aggregation during fruiting body formation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the size of the aggregate formed during sorocarp formation.
0031158	name:Name:negative regulation of aggregate size involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:down regulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:down-regulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:downregulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:inhibition of aggregate size	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the size of the aggregate formed during sorocarp formation.
0031159	name:Name:positive regulation of aggregate size involved in sorocarp development	name:Synonym:activation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:stimulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:up regulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:up-regulation of aggregate size	name:Synonym:upregulation of aggregate size	info:Definition:Any process that increases the size of the aggregate formed during sorocarp formation.
0031413	name:Name:regulation of buoyancy	name:Synonym:buoyancy regulation	info:Definition:Any process that modulates an organism's tendency or ability to rise or float in a fluid medium such as water or air, often through the use of stored gases.
0031647	name:Name:regulation of protein stability	info:Definition:Any process that affects the structure and integrity of a protein by altering the likelihood of its degradation or aggregation.
0031648	name:Name:protein destabilization	name:Synonym:negative regulation of protein stability	info:Definition:Any process that decreases the stability of a protein, making it more vulnerable to degradative processes or aggregation.
0050821	name:Name:protein stabilization	name:Synonym:lysosomal protein stabilization	name:Synonym:positive regulation of protein stability	name:Synonym:protein sequestering	name:Synonym:protein stabilization activity	info:Definition:Any process involved in maintaining the structure and integrity of a protein and preventing it from degradation or aggregation.
0032098	name:Name:regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:regulation of hunger	info:Definition:Any process which modulates appetite, the desire or physical craving for food.
0032099	name:Name:negative regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:appetite suppression	name:Synonym:down regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:down-regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:downregulation of appetite	name:Synonym:inhibition of appetite	name:Synonym:negative regulation of hunger	info:Definition:Any process that reduces appetite.
0032100	name:Name:positive regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:activation of appetite	name:Synonym:appetite stimulation	name:Synonym:positive regulation of hunger	name:Synonym:stimulation of appetite	name:Synonym:up regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:up-regulation of appetite	name:Synonym:upregulation of appetite	info:Definition:Any process that increases appetite.
0032972	name:Name:regulation of muscle filament sliding speed	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the velocity of muscle filament sliding.
0014915	name:Name:regulation of muscle filament sliding speed involved in regulation of the velocity of shortening in skeletal muscle contraction	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the velocity of muscle filament sliding, and consequently contributes to the regulation of the velocity of shortening of skeletal muscle contraction.
0035152	name:Name:regulation of tube architecture, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:regulation of tracheal tube architecture	info:Definition:Ensuring that tracheal cells form and maintain tubular structures with the correct size and shape for their position in the network. This is essential for efficient flow of gases through the tracheal network.
0035151	name:Name:regulation of tube size, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:regulation of tracheal tube size	info:Definition:Ensuring that an epithelial tube in an open tracheal system is of the correct length and diameter. Tracheal tubes undergo highly regulated tube-size increases during development, expanding up to 40 times their initial size by the end of larval life. Tube size appears to be controlled by regulation of apical membrane expansion and secretion, rather than by changes in cell number, size or shape.
0035160	name:Name:maintenance of epithelial integrity, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:maintenance of tracheal epithelial integrity	info:Definition:Ensuring that tracheal tubes in an open tracheal system maintain their epithelial structure during the cell shape changes and movements that occur during the branching process.
0035159	name:Name:regulation of tube length, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:regulation of tracheal tube length	name:Synonym:tracheal tube elongation	info:Definition:Ensuring that a tube in an open tracheal system is of the correct length.
0035296	name:Name:regulation of tube diameter	info:Definition:Ensuring that a tube is the correct width.
0035158	name:Name:regulation of tube diameter, open tracheal system	name:Synonym:regulation of tracheal tube diameter	name:Synonym:tracheal tube dilation	name:Synonym:tracheal tube expansion	info:Definition:Ensuring that a tube in an open tracheal system is of the correct diameter. When primary branches form their lumens are small (less than 2 micrometers) in caliber and must undergo regulated expansion during larval life to reach their mature size.
0035297	name:Name:regulation of Malpighian tubule diameter	info:Definition:Ensuring that the Malpighian tubule is the correct width. Malpighian tubules have a uniform circumference along their length; the circumference of the tubes is eight cells during the time the cells are dividing, after which the cells rearrange producting tubes with a cirumference of two cells.
0042592	name:Name:homeostatic process	name:Synonym:homeostasis	info:Definition:Any biological process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state.
0048872	name:Name:homeostasis of number of cells	name:Synonym:cell population homeostasis	name:Synonym:homeostasis of cell number	info:Definition:Any biological process involved in the maintenance of the steady-state number of cells within a population of cells.
0048878	name:Name:chemical homeostasis	info:Definition:Any biological process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state of a chemical.
0050828	name:Name:regulation of liquid surface tension	name:Synonym:regulation of surface tension of a liquid	name:Synonym:surfactant activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the surface tension of a liquid. Surface tension is the property that makes a liquid behave as if it had an elastic skin on its surface at the interface with a gas or an immiscible liquid.
0060249	name:Name:anatomical structure homeostasis	name:Synonym:anatomical structure maintenance	info:Definition:A homeostatic process involved in the maintenance of an internal steady state within a defined anatomical structure of an organism, including control of cellular proliferation and death and control of metabolic function. An anatomical structure is any biological entity that occupies space and is distinguished from its surroundings. Anatomical structures can be macroscopic such as a carpel, or microscopic such as an acrosome.
0043114	name:Name:regulation of vascular permeability	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the extent to which blood vessels can be pervaded by fluid.
0002528	name:Name:regulation of vascular permeability involved in acute inflammatory response	name:Synonym:regulation of vascular permeability during acute inflammatory response	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the extent to which blood vessels can be pervaded by fluid contributing to an acute inflammatory response.
0043116	name:Name:negative regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:down regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:down-regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:downregulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:inhibition of vascular permeability	info:Definition:Any process that reduces the extent to which blood vessels can be pervaded by fluid.
0043117	name:Name:positive regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:activation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:stimulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:up regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:up-regulation of vascular permeability	name:Synonym:upregulation of vascular permeability	info:Definition:Any process that increases the extent to which blood vessels can be pervaded by fluid.
0045924	name:Name:regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:female receptivity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the willingness or readiness of a female to receive male advances.
0007621	name:Name:negative regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:down regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:downregulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:inhibition of female receptivity	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the receptiveness of a female to male advances.
0045925	name:Name:positive regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:activation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:stimulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:up regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of female receptivity	name:Synonym:upregulation of female receptivity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the receptiveness of a female to male advances.
0048167	name:Name:regulation of synaptic plasticity	info:Definition:A process that modulates synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require. They may alter function, such as increasing or decreasing their sensitivity, or they may increase or decrease in actual numbers.
0031914	name:Name:negative regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:down regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:downregulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:inhibition of synaptic plasticity	info:Definition:A process that decreases synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require. They may alter function, such as increasing or decreasing their sensitivity, or they may increase or decrease in actual numbers.
0031915	name:Name:positive regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:activation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:stimulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:up regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of synaptic plasticity	name:Synonym:upregulation of synaptic plasticity	info:Definition:A process that increases synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require. They may alter function, such as increasing or decreasing their sensitivity, or they may increase or decrease in actual numbers.
0031916	name:Name:regulation of synaptic metaplasticity	info:Definition:A process that modulates synaptic metaplasticity. Metaplasticity is a higher-order form of plasticity and is manifest as a change in the ability to induce subsequent synaptic plasticity that is the ability of synapses to change as circumstances require.
0048168	name:Name:regulation of neuronal synaptic plasticity	info:Definition:A process that modulates neuronal synaptic plasticity, the ability of neuronal synapses to change as circumstances require. They may alter function, such as increasing or decreasing their sensitivity, or they may increase or decrease in actual numbers.
0060291	name:Name:long-term synaptic potentiation	name:Synonym:long-term potentiation	name:Synonym:LTP	info:Definition:A process that modulates synaptic plasticity such that synapses are changed resulting in the increase in the rate, or frequency of synaptic transmission at the synapse.
0060292	name:Name:long term synaptic depression	name:Synonym:long term depression	name:Synonym:LTD	info:Definition:A process that modulates synaptic plasticity such that synapses are changed resulting in the decrease in the rate, or frequency of synaptic transmission at the synapse.
0050803	name:Name:regulation of synapse structure and activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the physical form or the activity of a synapse, the junction between a neuron and a target (neuron, muscle, or secretory cell).
0051235	name:Name:maintenance of location	name:Synonym:retention	name:Synonym:sequestering	name:Synonym:storage	info:Definition:Any process in which a cell, substance or cellular entity, such as a protein complex or organelle, is maintained in a location and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0030730	name:Name:sequestering of triglyceride	name:Synonym:retention of triacylglycerol	name:Synonym:retention of triglyceride	name:Synonym:sequestering of triacylglycerol	name:Synonym:sequestration of triacylglycerol	name:Synonym:sequestration of triglyceride	name:Synonym:storage of triacylglycerol	name:Synonym:storage of triglyceride	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol retention	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol sequestering	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol sequestration	name:Synonym:triacylglycerol storage	name:Synonym:triglyceride retention	name:Synonym:triglyceride sequestering	name:Synonym:triglyceride sequestration	name:Synonym:triglyceride storage	info:Definition:The process of binding or confining any triester of glycerol such that it is separated from other components of a biological system.
0045185	name:Name:maintenance of protein location	name:Synonym:active protein retrieval	name:Synonym:maintenance of protein localization	name:Synonym:protein retention	name:Synonym:protein sequestering	info:Definition:Any process in which a protein is maintained in a location and prevented from moving elsewhere. These include sequestration, stabilization to prevent transport elsewhere and the active retrieval of proteins that do move away.
0051237	name:Name:maintenance of RNA location	name:Synonym:maintenance of RNA localization	name:Synonym:RNA retention	info:Definition:Any process in which RNA is maintained in a location and prevented from moving elsewhere.
0051238	name:Name:sequestering of metal ion	name:Synonym:metal ion retention	name:Synonym:metal ion sequestering	name:Synonym:metal ion sequestration	name:Synonym:metal ion storage	name:Synonym:retention of metal ion	name:Synonym:sequestration of metal ion	name:Synonym:storage of metal ion	info:Definition:The process of binding or confining metal ions such that they are separated from other components of a biological system.
0060296	name:Name:regulation of cilium beat frequency involved in ciliary motility	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency of cilium beating involved in ciliary motility.
0060303	name:Name:regulation of nucleosome density	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the number of nucleosomes in a given region of a chromosome.
0090066	name:Name:regulation of anatomical structure size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the size of an anatomical structure.
0014881	name:Name:regulation of myofibril size	name:Synonym:change of myofibril size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the size of myofibrils. A myofibril is the contractile element of skeletal and cardiac muscle. It is a long, highly organized bundle of actin, myosin, and other proteins that contracts by a sliding filament mechanism.
0032535	name:Name:regulation of cellular component size	info:Definition:A process that modulates the size of a cellular component.
0035150	name:Name:regulation of tube size	info:Definition:Ensuring that a tube is of the correct length and diameter. Tube size must be maintained not only during tube formation, but also throughout development and in some physiological processes.
0035564	name:Name:regulation of kidney size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the size of a kidney.
0090067	name:Name:regulation of thalamus size	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the size of the thalamus. The thalamus is a part of the diencephalon that is composed of the dorsal thalamus and the ventral thalamus.
0090225	name:Name:regulation of spindle density	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the number of microtubules in a given region of the spindle.
0065009	name:Name:regulation of molecular function	name:Synonym:regulation of a molecular function	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of a molecular function, an elemental biological activity occurring at the molecular level, such as catalysis or binding.
0010469	name:Name:regulation of receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of receptor activity. Receptor activity is when a molecule combines with an extracellular or intracellular messenger to initiate a change in cell activity.
0007176	name:Name:regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of EGF receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of EGFR activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of EGF receptor activity.
0031551	name:Name:regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of BDNF receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of brain-derived neurotrophic factor receptor activity.
0031585	name:Name:regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-sensitive calcium-release channel activity	name:Synonym:regulation of inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of IP3 receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-sensitive calcium-release channel.
0051394	name:Name:regulation of nerve growth factor receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of NGF receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of the nerve growth factor receptor.
0060725	name:Name:regulation of coreceptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate or frequency of coreceptor activity, combining with an extracellular or intracellular messenger, and in cooperation with a nearby primary receptor, initiating a change in cell activity.
2000272	name:Name:negative regulation of receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of receptor activity.
2000273	name:Name:positive regulation of receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of receptor activity.
2000310	name:Name:regulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate selective glutamate receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of NMDA receptor	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of N-methyl-D-aspartate selective glutamate receptor activity.
2000311	name:Name:regulation of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate selective glutamate receptor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of AMPA receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate selective glutamate receptor activity.
2000312	name:Name:regulation of kainate selective glutamate receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of kainate selective glutamate receptor activity.
2000823	name:Name:regulation of androgen receptor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of androgen receptor activity.
0032409	name:Name:regulation of transporter activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the activity of a transporter.
0022898	name:Name:regulation of transmembrane transporter activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of transmembrane transporter activity.
0032410	name:Name:negative regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:down regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:downregulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:inhibition of transporter activity	info:Definition:Any process that stops or reduces the activity of a transporter.
0032411	name:Name:positive regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:activation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:stimulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:up regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of transporter activity	name:Synonym:upregulation of transporter activity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the activity of a transporter.
0060694	name:Name:regulation of cholesterol transporter activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the rate, frequency, or extent of cholesterol transporter activity.
0040030	name:Name:regulation of molecular function, epigenetic	name:Synonym:regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	info:Definition:Any heritable epigenetic process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of protein function by self-perpetuating conformational conversions of normal proteins in healthy cells. This is distinct from, though mechanistically analogous to, disease states associated with prion propagation and amyloidogenesis. A single protein, if it carries a glutamine/asparagine-rich ('prion') domain, can sometimes stably exist in at least two distinct physical states, each associated with a different phenotype; propagation of one of these traits is achieved by a self-perpetuating change in the protein from one form to the other, mediated by conformational changes in the glutamine/asparagine-rich domain. Prion domains are both modular and transferable to other proteins, on which they can confer a heritable epigenetic alteration of function; existing bioinformatics data indicate that they are rare in non-eukarya, but common in eukarya.
0045857	name:Name:negative regulation of molecular function, epigenetic	name:Synonym:down regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:down-regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:downregulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:inhibition of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:negative regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	info:Definition:Any heritable epigenetic process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of protein function by self-perpetuating conformational conversions of normal proteins in healthy cells. This is distinct from, though mechanistically analogous to, disease states associated with prion propagation and amyloidogenesis. A single protein, if it carries a glutamine/asparagine-rich ('prion') domain, can sometimes stably exist in at least two distinct physical states, each associated with a different phenotype; propagation of one of these traits is achieved by a self-perpetuating change in the protein from one form to the other, mediated by conformational changes in the glutamine/asparagine-rich domain. Prion domains are both modular and transferable to other proteins, on which they can confer a heritable epigenetic alteration of function; existing bioinformatics data indicate that they are rare in non-eukarya, but common in eukarya.
0045858	name:Name:positive regulation of molecular function, epigenetic	name:Synonym:activation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:positive regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:stimulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:up regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:up-regulation of protein activity, epigenetic	name:Synonym:upregulation of protein activity, epigenetic	info:Definition:Any heritable epigenetic process that increases the frequency, rate or extent of protein function by self-perpetuating conformational conversions of normal proteins in healthy cells. This is distinct from, though mechanistically analogous to, disease states associated with prion propagation and amyloidogenesis. A single protein, if it carries a glutamine/asparagine-rich ('prion') domain, can sometimes stably exist in at least two distinct physical states, each associated with a different phenotype; propagation of one of these traits is achieved by a self-perpetuating change in the protein from one form to the other, mediated by conformational changes in the glutamine/asparagine-rich domain. Prion domains are both modular and transferable to other proteins, on which they can confer a heritable epigenetic alteration of function; existing bioinformatics data indicate that they are rare in non-eukarya, but common in eukarya.
0044092	name:Name:negative regulation of molecular function	info:Definition:Any process that stops or reduces the rate or extent of a molecular function, an elemental biological activity occurring at the molecular level, such as catalysis or binding.
0043086	name:Name:negative regulation of catalytic activity	name:Synonym:down regulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:downregulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:inhibition of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:negative regulation of enzyme activity	info:Definition:Any process that stops or reduces the activity of an enzyme.
0043433	name:Name:negative regulation of sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:down regulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:down-regulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:downregulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:inhibition of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:negative regulation of transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of a transcription factor, any factor involved in the initiation or regulation of transcription.
0051100	name:Name:negative regulation of binding	name:Synonym:down regulation of binding	name:Synonym:down-regulation of binding	name:Synonym:downregulation of binding	name:Synonym:inhibition of binding	info:Definition:Any process that stops or reduces the rate or extent of binding, the selective interaction of a molecule with one or more specific sites on another molecule.
0052204	name:Name:negative regulation of molecular function in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:down regulation of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:down-regulation of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:downregulation of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:inhibition of protein function in other organism	name:Synonym:inhibition of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:negative regulation of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:Any process in which an organism stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the functional activity of proteins in a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
2000326	name:Name:negative regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity	name:Synonym:negative regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription co-activator activity	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity.
0044093	name:Name:positive regulation of molecular function	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of a molecular function, an elemental biological activity occurring at the molecular level, such as catalysis or binding.
0043085	name:Name:positive regulation of catalytic activity	name:Synonym:activation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:positive regulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:stimulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:up regulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of enzyme activity	name:Synonym:upregulation of enzyme activity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the activity of an enzyme.
0051091	name:Name:positive regulation of sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:activation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:positive regulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:stimulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:up regulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:up-regulation of transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:upregulation of transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of activity of a transcription factor, any factor involved in the initiation or regulation of transcription.
0051099	name:Name:positive regulation of binding	name:Synonym:activation of binding	name:Synonym:stimulation of binding	name:Synonym:up regulation of binding	name:Synonym:up-regulation of binding	name:Synonym:upregulation of binding	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the rate or extent of binding, the selective interaction of a molecule with one or more specific sites on another molecule.
2000327	name:Name:positive regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity	name:Synonym:positive regulation of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription co-activator activity	info:Definition:Any process that activates or increases the frequency, rate or extent of ligand-dependent nuclear receptor transcription coactivator activity.
0051090	name:Name:regulation of sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor activity	name:Synonym:regulation of transcription factor activity	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the activity of a transcription factor, any factor involved in the initiation or regulation of transcription.
0051098	name:Name:regulation of binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of binding, the selective interaction of a molecule with one or more specific sites on another molecule.
0035561	name:Name:regulation of chromatin binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of chromatin binding. Chromatin binding is the selective interaction with chromatin, the network of fibers of DNA and protein that make up the chromosomes of the eukaryotic nucleus during interphase.
0043393	name:Name:regulation of protein binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of protein binding.
0051101	name:Name:regulation of DNA binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of DNA binding. DNA binding is any process in which a gene product interacts selectively with DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).
2000460	name:Name:regulation of eukaryotic cell surface binding	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of eukaryotic cell surface binding.
0052205	name:Name:modulation of molecular function in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modification of molecular function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modification of protein function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modulation of molecular function in other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the function of proteins in a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052055	name:Name:modulation by symbiont of host molecular function	name:Synonym:modification by symbiont of host molecular function	name:Synonym:modification by symbiont of host protein function	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the function of a host protein via a direct interaction. The host is defined as the larger of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0052203	name:Name:modulation of catalytic activity in other organism involved in symbiotic interaction	name:Synonym:modulation of enzyme activity within other organism during symbiotic interaction	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in enzyme activity in a second organism, where the two organisms are in a symbiotic interaction.
0052428	name:Name:modification by host of symbiont molecular function	name:Synonym:modification by host of symbiont protein function	info:Definition:The process in which an organism effects a change in the function of proteins in the symbiont organism. The symbiont is defined as the smaller of the organisms involved in a symbiotic interaction.
0071580	name:Name:regulation of zinc ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of zinc ions (Zn2+) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0071581	name:Name:regulation of zinc ion import	info:Definition:Any process that modulates the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of zinc ions (Zn2+) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0071584	name:Name:negative regulation of zinc ion import	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of zinc ions (Zn2+) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0071583	name:Name:negative regulation of zinc ion transmembrane transport	info:Definition:Any process that stops, prevents, or reduces the frequency, rate or extent of the directed movement of zinc ions (Zn2+) from one side of a membrane to the other.
0071840	name:Name:cellular component organization or biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellular component.
0016043	name:Name:cellular component organization	name:Synonym:cell organisation	name:Synonym:cell organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cellular component.
0022411	name:Name:cellular component disassembly	name:Synonym:cell structure disassembly	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the breakdown of a cellular component.
0032984	name:Name:macromolecular complex disassembly	name:Synonym:macromolecule complex disassembly	info:Definition:The disaggregation of a macromolecular complex into its constituent components.
0060871	name:Name:cellular cell wall disassembly	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the breakdown of the cell wall.
0022607	name:Name:cellular component assembly	name:Synonym:cell structure assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a cellular component.
0065003	name:Name:macromolecular complex assembly	name:Synonym:macromolecule complex assembly	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of macromolecules to form a complex.
0043933	name:Name:macromolecular complex subunit organization	name:Synonym:macromolecular complex organization	name:Synonym:macromolecular complex subunit organisation	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a macromolecular complex.
0001115	name:Name:protein-DNA-RNA complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a protein-DNA-RNA complex.
0034367	name:Name:macromolecular complex remodeling	info:Definition:The acquisition, loss, or modification of macromolecules within a complex, resulting in the alteration of an existing complex.
0071822	name:Name:protein complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a protein complex.
0071823	name:Name:protein-carbohydrate complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a protein-carbohydrate complex.
0071824	name:Name:protein-DNA complex subunit organization	name:Synonym:DNA-protein complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a protein-DNA complex.
0071825	name:Name:protein-lipid complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a protein-lipid complex.
0071826	name:Name:ribonucleoprotein complex subunit organization	name:Synonym:protein-RNA complex subunit organization	name:Synonym:RNA-protein complex subunit organization	info:Definition:Any process in which macromolecules aggregate, disaggregate, or are modified, resulting in the formation, disassembly, or alteration of a ribonucleoprotein complex.
0043954	name:Name:cellular component maintenance	info:Definition:The organization process that preserves a cellular component in a stable functional or structural state.
0045494	name:Name:photoreceptor cell maintenance	info:Definition:Any process preventing the degeneration of the photoreceptor, a specialized cell type that is sensitive to light.
0045229	name:Name:external encapsulating structure organization	name:Synonym:external encapsulating structure organisation	name:Synonym:external encapsulating structure organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of external structures that lie outside the plasma membrane and surround the entire cell.
0043163	name:Name:cell envelope organization	name:Synonym:cell envelope organisation	name:Synonym:cell envelope organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the cell envelope, everything external to, but not including, the cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria, encompassing the periplasmic space, cell wall, and outer membrane if present.
0045230	name:Name:capsule organization	name:Synonym:capsule organisation	name:Synonym:capsule organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the capsule, a protective structure surrounding some species of bacteria and fungi.
0045231	name:Name:slime layer organization	name:Synonym:slime layer organisation	name:Synonym:slime layer organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a slime layer. A slime layer is an easily removed, diffuse, unorganized layer of extracellular material that surrounds a cell.
0045232	name:Name:S-layer organization	name:Synonym:S-layer organisation	name:Synonym:S-layer organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of an S-layer enveloping the cell. The S-layer is a crystalline protein layer surrounding some bacteria.
0070499	name:Name:exosporium assembly	name:Synonym:exosporium formation	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the formation of an exosporium, the outermost layer of a bacterial endospore.
0050808	name:Name:synapse organization	name:Synonym:synapse development	name:Synonym:synapse morphogenesis	name:Synonym:synapse organisation	name:Synonym:synapse organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a synapse, the junction between a neuron and a target (neuron, muscle, or secretory cell).
0007416	name:Name:synapse assembly	name:Synonym:synapse biogenesis	name:Synonym:synaptogenesis	info:Definition:The aggregation, arrangement and bonding together of a set of components to form a synapse.
0007528	name:Name:neuromuscular junction development	info:Definition:The process whose specific outcome is the progression of the neuromuscular junction over time, from its formation to the mature structure.
0007529	name:Name:establishment of synaptic specificity at neuromuscular junction	info:Definition:The biological process in which a synapse between a motor neuron and a muscle is initially formed.
0097106	name:Name:postsynaptic density organization	name:Synonym:post synaptic density organization	name:Synonym:post-synaptic density organization	name:Synonym:postsynaptic density organisation	name:Synonym:PSD organization	info:Definition:A process that results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a postsynaptic density, a region that lies adjacent to the cytoplasmic face of the postsynaptic membrane at excitatory synapse.
0061024	name:Name:membrane organization	info:Definition:A process which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a membrane. A membrane is a double layer of lipid molecules that encloses all cells, and, in eukaryotes, many organelles; may be a single or double lipid bilayer; also includes associated proteins.
0061025	name:Name:membrane fusion	info:Definition:The membrane organization process that joins two lipid bilayers to form a single membrane.
0080177	name:Name:plastoglobule organization	info:Definition:A process that is carried out at the cellular level which results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the plastoglobule. Plastoglobule is a lipoprotein particle present in chloroplasts. They are rich in non-polar lipids (triglycerides, esters) as well as in prenylquinones, plastoquinone and tocopherols. Plastoglobules are often associated with thylakoid membranes, suggesting an exchange of lipids with thylakoids.
0044085	name:Name:cellular component biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a cellular component. Includes biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, and those macromolecular modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the cellular component.
0070271	name:Name:protein complex biogenesis	name:Synonym:protein complex biogenesis and assembly	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a protein complex. Includes the synthesis of the constituent protein molecules, and those protein modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the complex.
0072668	name:Name:tubulin complex biogenesis	info:Definition:A cellular process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, and arrangement of constituent parts of a tubulin complex. Includes the synthesis and folding of the constituent protein molecules, and those protein modifications that are involved in synthesis or assembly of the complex. A tubulin complex is a heterodimer of tubulins alpha and beta, from which microtubules are assembled.
0097031	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I biogenesis	info:Definition:The biogenesis of a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I, a protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Includes the synthesis of constituent proteins and their aggregation, arrangement and bonding together.
0097032	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II biogenesis	info:Definition:The biogenesis of a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II, a protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Includes the synthesis of constituent proteins and their aggregation, arrangement and bonding together.
0097033	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III biogenesis	name:Synonym:mitochondrial cytochrome bc(1) complex biogenesis	info:Definition:The biogenesis of a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III (also known as cytochrome bc(1) complex or ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase), a protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Includes the synthesis of constituent proteins and their aggregation, arrangement and bonding together.
0097034	name:Name:mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV biogenesis	name:Synonym:mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase complex biogenesis	info:Definition:The biogenesis of a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV (also known as cytochrome c oxidase complex), a protein complex located in the mitochondrial inner membrane that forms part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Includes the synthesis of constituent proteins and their aggregation, arrangement and bonding together.
0071554	name:Name:cell wall organization or biogenesis	name:Synonym:cell wall organisation or biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the biosynthesis of constituent macromolecules, assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of a cell wall.
0071555	name:Name:cell wall organization	name:Synonym:cell wall organisation	name:Synonym:cell wall organization and biogenesis	info:Definition:A process that results in the assembly, arrangement of constituent parts, or disassembly of the cell wall, the rigid or semi-rigid envelope lying outside the cell membrane of plant, fungal and most prokaryotic cells, maintaining their shape and protecting them from osmotic lysis.
0042545	name:Name:cell wall modification	info:Definition:The series of events leading to chemical and structural alterations of an existing cell wall that can result in loosening, increased extensibility or disassembly.
0044277	name:Name:cell wall disassembly	info:Definition:A process that results in the breakdown of the cell wall.
